[Amit Varma]: Religion is about a lot more than God, and that is more visible in India than anywhere
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Amit Varma]: I am a non-believer, and if belief in God was all there was to religion, then I could
[Amit Varma]: just ignore it.
[Amit Varma]: But there's much more to it than that.
[Amit Varma]: Religion can give people a sense of community, often even unity, and shapes, cultures and
[Amit Varma]: cuisines and art.
[Amit Varma]: On the flip side, it can play to our worst tribalistic instincts and divide people, just
[Amit Varma]: as it can unite them.
[Amit Varma]: I often say on the show that people contain multitudes, or India contains multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: and when it comes to religion, this is actually more true of India than perhaps any other
[Amit Varma]: place in the world.
[Amit Varma]: All the religions in the world exist here, even thrive here, and we have more gods and
[Amit Varma]: goddesses in India than even spices, and indeed, the one area that most reflects this incredible
[Amit Varma]: melting pot of a nation is our food.
[Amit Varma]: And whether or not you believe in God, I think we can both agree that Indian food can be
[Amit Varma]: divine, and religion has played a part in that.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a prolific columnist and author, Shobha Narayan.
[Amit Varma]: Shobha has just come out with a fascinating book called Food and Faith, A Pilgrim's Journey
[Amit Varma]: Through India.
[Amit Varma]: In Food and Faith, Shobha travels to 15 places of worship in the subcontinent and writes
[Amit Varma]: about the food you get there.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is not just a book about travel or food, it's also about our history and our
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: And it worked for me at multiple levels, mainly because the author's own explorations, her
[Amit Varma]: intellectual and emotional journey was so much a part of the writing.
[Amit Varma]: I was delighted to have Shobha on the show, and we had a freewheeling conversation that
[Amit Varma]: is as much about religion and Indian society as about food.
[Amit Varma]: I found it in more ways than one to be a mouthwatering discussion.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of The Seen and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called Tapchief.
[Amit Varma]: Tapchief at tapchief.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers.
[Amit Varma]: And Tapchief's network includes more than 125,000 people as of now.
[Amit Varma]: You want people to make you a webpage or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some digital
[Amit Varma]: marketing for you, Tapchief gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing
[Amit Varma]: for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from firsthand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about.
[Amit Varma]: So do go over to tapchief.com and check out all that Tapchief has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Shobha, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Shobha, I loved reading your superb book.
[Amit Varma]: But before we kind of get to the book, I'm also sort of fascinated by your journey in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that I've read your column for many years in Mint and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And whenever I read anything by you, I mean, the three things I would typically associate
[Amit Varma]: you with are food, travel and writing.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you write a lot about food and travel.
[Amit Varma]: But you've also, you know, done journalism in Colombia and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your background and your sort of journey of, you know, living
[Amit Varma]: in different places in the world and how that affected what you do.
[Guest]: I grew up in Chennai.
[Guest]: And I was one of those kids who knew early on that I wanted to be a writer.
[Guest]: Even while I was in college in Women's Christian College in Chennai, I used to write for the
[Guest]: Indian Express and Aside.
[Guest]: There was this wonderful magazine called Aside in Chennai, which was run by Janaki Venkatraman.
[Guest]: Those days, there were no emails, so I walked up to her and said, Can I write for you?
[Guest]: And she agreed.
[Guest]: And I used to write columns occasionally for the Indian Express, which at that time was
[Guest]: edited by Rajmohan Gandhi.
[Guest]: So very illustrious man, as you know.
[Guest]: So as a college student, I wrote, as a school student, I wrote poetry.
[Guest]: So I was one of those kids who just has written all her life.
[Guest]: I took a detour in college, when I went abroad to complete my undergraduate, I studied art
[Guest]: and sculpture.
[Guest]: And I have since developed an interest in that.
[Guest]: I went to a women's college there, too, called Mount Holyoke, where I did art.
[Guest]: And then after a master's in finance, I finally returned to journalism at the Columbia J School.
[Guest]: It was a one year program.
[Guest]: It was a boot camp in many words.
[Guest]: You had to ride in the back of a police car to do police reporting.
[Guest]: You had to go to the criminal courts to write about law and trials and things like that.
[Guest]: But I have always been drawn to memoirs.
[Guest]: And my first break in food writing came when the New York Times announced a competition.
[Guest]: They took a half page ad and said, write 150 words about food.
[Guest]: And if your essay is chosen by Ruth Reisel, who was then the restaurant critic of the
[Guest]: New York Times, we will give you a $1,000 coupon to use as you wish.
[Guest]: So as an impoverished student, the appeal of getting $1,000 to dine in New York was
[Guest]: very irresistible.
[Guest]: So I discovered, you know, writing 150 words and making an essay in that, in some ways
[Guest]: harder than writing 850 words, which is what you and I do for our letters and blogs and
[Guest]: columns.
[Guest]: So condensing a narrative in 150 words was difficult.
[Guest]: I did it and I won the prize.
[Guest]: I should have dug up the essay, which I could have read to you.
[Guest]: But it was about India, 1986.
[Guest]: I want to study in America, but my grandparents will not allow me.
[Guest]: Finally, the elders decide that they will ask me to prepare a feast, one that they are
[Guest]: sure I will fail because I don't know cooking.
[Guest]: And so I take up the challenge and then I describe the feast.
[Guest]: And each line had, so there was the bindi roasted in oil with fennel seeds.
[Guest]: And then there was the rasam piping hot with a sprinkling of coriander leaves on top.
[Guest]: There was rice served with streams of mist on top and ghee, golden ghee.
[Guest]: So essentially it was a practice in food writing, so the practice in describing food in a very
[Guest]: condensed way.
[Guest]: So when I won the award, I got this $1,000 coupon, which I dined away.
[Guest]: And Ruth Reichel, who went on from The Times to edit Gourmet, which is the late great gourmet,
[Guest]: as I call it, she said, why don't you expand this 150 word essay and make it into 1,500
[Guest]: words?
[Guest]: And that was how the food writing began.
[Guest]: They called it The God of Small Feasts and it was published in Gourmet.
[Guest]: And beginner's luck, it won this James Beard Award for the MFK Fisher Award for Distinguished
[Guest]: Food Writing was big.
[Guest]: And that was how I first learned about MFK Fisher and I went on to read her book.
[Guest]: And then just kept writing about food and wine, Bon Appetit, Gourmet while I was in
[Guest]: Manhattan and then moved to India and wrote about food as well for Mint.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's quite a mind blowing story and to do it in 150 words seems to me almost impossible.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I teach my writing course, I often quote Blaise Pascal's famous quote about when
[Amit Varma]: he wrote a letter to someone and he said, you know, quote, apologies for sending you
[Amit Varma]: a long letter.
[Amit Varma]: I did not have time to write you a short one, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: I think anyone who's ever written to a word count or a deadline knows exactly how hard
[Amit Varma]: it is.
[Amit Varma]: So and while you were describing it to me just now, you know, even though I just had
[Amit Varma]: my brunch, my mouth was kind of watering right away.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what is it that drew you to food writing in particular?
[Amit Varma]: Like was it that this challenge came up and you liked food and you liked writing and you
[Amit Varma]: said that, okay, I'll, you know, combine these two and try it out?
[Amit Varma]: Or were you already reading food writers?
[Amit Varma]: If so, who were the writers, food writers and otherwise, who you really enjoyed and
[Amit Varma]: thought that they might, you know, shine a light on the kind of writing that you want
[Amit Varma]: to do?
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process of evolving as a writer and, and then as a food writer, because
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that, you know, when one starts writing about food, you will sort of begin
[Amit Varma]: by writing about the sensory experience of the food, the smells, the taste, the look
[Amit Varma]: of it, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But then you move on as indeed you have in this book, you move on to the wider cultural
[Amit Varma]: and social significances and the resonances that food carries.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, was that there from the start or is that something that you kind of, that
[Amit Varma]: evolved within your writing as well?
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: So Amit, as you know, there are two types of food writing.
[Guest]: One is the writing of recipes and cookbooks and the other is the kind of work that I do.
[Guest]: I'm not a good cook in my kitchen.
[Guest]: And I stumbled on food writing, unlike writing in general, where I was one of those kids
[Guest]: who wrote.
[Guest]: Food writing didn't come naturally to me.
[Guest]: While in Chennai, I wrote about sabas and music and, you know, whatever the editor assigned
[Guest]: me to do.
[Guest]: Food writing literally was a break, a fortunate happenstance, a discovery of a skill that
[Guest]: I didn't know existed because all in pursuit of $1,000 of a food coupon.
[Guest]: And since then, I have worked at it.
[Guest]: I think food writing is different from cooking.
[Guest]: I don't think the two are together.
[Guest]: In order to write about food, you don't need to be a good cook.
[Guest]: You need to have a good palate.
[Guest]: And as M.S.K.
[Guest]: Fisher said, you need to have the capacity to eat prodigious amounts of food.
[Guest]: And as you are eating it, to think about it, you need to have taste and you need to have
[Guest]: good eye to observe.
[Guest]: So Meenakshi Amal's classic book, Samaythi Paar, which every Tamilian has and carries
[Guest]: this three volumes, is a precision.
[Guest]: It is about use of this particular type of rice cooked to this particular amount.
[Guest]: And she even describes how you, the Tamil word is aathardhu, which means to make cool.
[Guest]: There are ways in which you make cool before.
[Guest]: For example, in Tamil cooking, there is a dish called beans paruppuursali, which is
[Guest]: beans in which you put the channaikkadal and you grind it and then you put it in.
[Guest]: And then you steam it.
[Guest]: And then she describes how you cool it.
[Guest]: You put, I mean, in the olden days, my grandmother would put it out on a rice cloth, an old stone
[Guest]: dhoti and cool it.
[Guest]: So that is a very precise type of Kubuk kind of observation, how you cool, how you cook,
[Guest]: how long you cook and what is the smell that emanates when the idli is done.
[Guest]: The kind of writing I do involves being, to quote Isaiah Berlin, the fox and the hedgehog,
[Guest]: you need to have a wide spectrum, the surface area has to be quite large and you need to
[Guest]: be able to connect history and philosophy and feminism for me and sensuality and India.
[Guest]: So that's what my kind of writing does.
[Guest]: And how did I cultivate that skill is I think that reading a lot, as you say, I was introduced
[Guest]: after writing to all the big American writers and Katie Achaya is a must read if you are
[Guest]: an Indian food writer.
[Guest]: I read Bikram Doctor's columns religiously, I read Harold McGee who wrote an encyclopedia
[Guest]: about food.
[Guest]: And then, I mean, I have a long list.
[Guest]: While in gourmet, one of the pleasures was to be exposed to food writers.
[Guest]: So Fuchsia Dunlap's books on Chinese cooking is one that I read.
[Guest]: Michael Pollan, of course, although now he's overused, everybody reads him.
[Guest]: There's a wonderful book called The Man Who Ate Everything, written by Jeffrey Steingarten.
[Guest]: He was the food columnist for Vogue.
[Guest]: And he wrote this fantastic book of essays called The Man Who Ate Everything.
[Guest]: And then in it, for example, he will take French fries, and he will conduct experiment
[Guest]: to see which is the best kind of French fry and how you make it.
[Guest]: So those are that.
[Guest]: I loved a book called Feast, the Food of the Islamic World by a woman called Anisa Helou.
[Guest]: And if I'm pronouncing it right, and what was fantastic about that is as a vegetarian,
[Guest]: you tend to basically keep away, I mean, you think that books that focus on non-vegetarian
[Guest]: food are not useful to you.
[Guest]: But this book, for example, even though I don't eat meat kebab, she places them side
[Guest]: by side by side and then describes how a Turkish kebab is different from a Iranian kebab, from
[Guest]: an Iraqi, Iraq kebab in Iraq.
[Guest]: And it was an experience of description of the kind that is very useful to me and of
[Guest]: history and milieu and stories and community and family and cooking.
[Guest]: Cooking comes last in a way.
[Guest]: So that was good.
[Guest]: Then once you get into it, again, Vikram's columns will introduce me to Manasol Lhasa.
[Guest]: These are Sanskrit texts from the old, K.P. Acharya talks about it a lot.
[Guest]: So these are the things I read.
[Guest]: And then there's an Indian book by Colleen Taylor Senner called Feasts and Fasts.
[Guest]: That's a wonderful book because it anchors food history in India in a very scholarly
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: So for example, there are recipes for barbecued rat and there are recipes that basically convince
[Guest]: you that we were not the prudes that we have become in terms of our attitude towards animals,
[Guest]: certainly the cow and our attitudes towards meat and our attitudes towards cooking and
[Guest]: this whole purity and non-purity that has invaded the Brahminical kitchen since.
[Guest]: So that was good.
[Guest]: So then I can give you a longer list if you like, but that's a start.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you've actually, you know, with this answer, you actually you said you can't
[Amit Varma]: cook, but you've provided a feast of reading for my listeners and for me, because I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: many of these books are now going to get gobbled up by us.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we share our admiration of Vikram Docter.
[Amit Varma]: He's a good friend.
[Amit Varma]: He's been on the show, in fact, talking about the Indianness of Indian food was the name
[Amit Varma]: of the episode.
[Amit Varma]: And it was all about almost how everything that we consider Indian is from somewhere
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of have a question also about how writing about something can shape a person
[Amit Varma]: like at the obvious level, like this is again a sort of a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's really the same question, but two different directions.
[Amit Varma]: And one is obviously that one would expect that when you begin writing about food, obviously
[Amit Varma]: your palate will get more refined because you will pay more attention and be more mindful
[Amit Varma]: about all the individual things that go into what you're eating and the processes and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: So did that happen with you?
[Amit Varma]: And the second part is the kind of food writing that you have done would also then mean that
[Amit Varma]: you're not only expanding your palate, but you're also expanding your mind because you
[Amit Varma]: want to make these cultural connections, these social connections, historical connections,
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that it then, you know, incentivizes you to read much more widely and almost in
[Amit Varma]: that sense and become a different person than who you would have been if you weren't a food
[Amit Varma]: writer.
[Amit Varma]: Is there something to that?
[Guest]: The short answer, Amit, is that yes, it changed my palate.
[Guest]: It changed my palate in a very specific way, it forced me to pay attention to what I was
[Guest]: eating.
[Guest]: You're just gobbling it up.
[Guest]: So it also defined in sharp focus that I was losing a whole spectrum of taste because I
[Guest]: happened to be a vegetarian and I have not been able to eat meat or fish or chicken.
[Guest]: A friend of mine said this best.
[Guest]: He said, eat meat if you want to, just before you die, because then the amount of time that
[Guest]: you'll spend regretting will be the least.
[Guest]: So that said, I realized that a spectrum is lost to me.
[Guest]: But what I think what being vegetarian does is that it forces you to pay attention to
[Guest]: all the other flavors because you're losing out on something.
[Guest]: So how do you eat is the question.
[Guest]: How do you eat if you want to write about food?
[Guest]: And how do you take notes?
[Guest]: How do you keep mental notes?
[Guest]: Very slowly, start by eating very slowly, start by savoring the food.
[Guest]: And I think that restaurant menus, for example, I always read them because they give me a
[Guest]: way of, in India less so, but certainly in other countries, you can tell the chef's influence
[Guest]: on the menu in the way they have written it.
[Guest]: So for example, braised, does he use the word boiled or braised potatoes?
[Guest]: Does he use the word sautéed, beans, or does he use stir fried?
[Guest]: What is the taste difference between, I mean, just like computer technology has very specific
[Guest]: words, cooking has specific words.
[Guest]: And the question I always face is that, is it reflected in the taste of the food?
[Guest]: Chinese food, for example, is entirely about braised, sautéed, vegetables, cabbage, but
[Guest]: take the fourth cabbage and do it four different ways and see how it tastes differently.
[Guest]: The other thing I always pay attention to is the environment and restaurants are a great
[Guest]: place for that.
[Guest]: For example, in India, there is a notion that the chef or the cook's temperament matters,
[Guest]: which is why if you go to Hare Krishna kitchens, or if you go to temple kitchens, they will
[Guest]: chant the Lord's name, for example, or there will be peaceful music playing in the background.
[Guest]: Some of my grandparents' friends, they would not eat outside food because they said that,
[Guest]: in Tamil, we call it Yenna Padilgal, Yenna Padilgal means the thought stamp of the chef
[Guest]: matters and it will influence how you eat and it will influence your body.
[Guest]: I have interviewed chefs in New York, you go into restaurant kitchens of Daniel Boulud
[Guest]: or John George, or it is a hellhole.
[Guest]: People are screaming, people are cursing, the food that comes out is sublime.
[Guest]: So that's the other thing is that the milieu matters.
[Guest]: How does the chef's temperament get translated to the waiter who describes the food to us?
[Guest]: There's that whole chain and I pay attention to that and how does it, and the way what
[Guest]: people choose, I studied psychology in Women's Cuisine College as an undergraduate, there
[Guest]: was this very cool study where people would look at the menu and the first person, if
[Guest]: they call out what you want, you will sort of be forced to call out something else, even
[Guest]: if you actually wanted that dish to be different.
[Guest]: So the psychology of ordering of food in restaurants or the psychology of eating is what I pay
[Guest]: attention to.
[Guest]: History is a very obvious one, but that doesn't come in the act of eating.
[Guest]: When the act of eating, it is about using the fork or the spoon, using the hand, the
[Guest]: tactility of the fingers, which is how we eat, the culture that invented chopsticks
[Guest]: and why did China invent chopsticks as opposed to the spoon?
[Guest]: So those are the kinds of questions you ponder while you are at the table.
[Guest]: And I love eating at restaurants and because of all these things.
[Guest]: The history comes afterwards.
[Guest]: The history is not linked to a dish in my view, the history is linked to a cuisine.
[Guest]: So the Middle East is fascinating to me because I think some of the best writers of Middle
[Guest]: Eastern cuisine are women, but it's such a male-centric culture.
[Guest]: So how did that happen?
[Guest]: And then learning about, for example, there was a wonderful cookbook called the Syriana
[Guest]: Cookbook and by Latika George, I believe it was.
[Guest]: And the Syrian Christian food is heavily fish-centric.
[Guest]: I don't eat fish, but what you got out of that cookbook was the milieu of Syrian Christians
[Guest]: and as somebody who spent a lot of time in Kerala, it was a wonderful read for that reason.
[Guest]: So to answer your question about palate cultivation, I think slowing down and paying attention,
[Guest]: making connections as disparate as you can would be the three things I do in terms of
[Guest]: how it has expanded me is that the slowing down, paying attention, savoring, making disparate
[Guest]: connections force you to each of those has like a four-factor output, which forces you
[Guest]: to read four different types of books or come back and research for different types of things.
[Amit Varma]: So that's what it is.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: My other sort of observation about a lot of your writing is that in one sense, even when
[Amit Varma]: you're writing about food, it is like in this book, I got this sense and more senses and
[Amit Varma]: the fact that you just went to all these different sites, but that it's a travel book and it's
[Amit Varma]: not just a travel book in the sense that it is about travel.
[Amit Varma]: It is your travel book in the sense that it is about your journey, not just your sort
[Amit Varma]: of physical journey through space, but also how you are evolving and changing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before I kind of get to the book, what I was wondering about was that you've lived
[Amit Varma]: in different countries at different parts of your life.
[Amit Varma]: You have also written extensively about, you know, first settling into America, then, you
[Amit Varma]: know, coming back to India and settling in here.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that someone who travels like that, who is sort of, in a sense, I wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: say uprooted because these are all choices that you made, but someone who chooses to
[Amit Varma]: live somewhere else and then come back somewhere else is forced to do something that others
[Amit Varma]: who stay in one place are not, which is to constantly re-examine themselves, re-examine
[Amit Varma]: their sense of self, their self of identity, and all of that, which in the context of religion,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, there's a lot of in this book, which I'll ask you later.
[Amit Varma]: But in a general sense, you know, what has that kind of exploration been like?
[Amit Varma]: Because it always strikes me that, you know, we always assume that individuals are what
[Amit Varma]: individuals are, right?
[Amit Varma]: As if it's, you know, you are a fixed person at a given point in time.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that, you know, if you had a different set of experiences, you would
[Amit Varma]: be a fundamentally different person.
[Amit Varma]: How do you think all of this shaped you?
[Amit Varma]: You know, was it easy to settle into another culture?
[Amit Varma]: How did it make you look at your own identity as an immigrant and as someone born a Hindu?
[Amit Varma]: You know, did it make you more open?
[Amit Varma]: Did it, you know, like some immigrants to the US, for example, become more assertive
[Amit Varma]: about their cultural roots and all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about how that journey happened for you.
[Guest]: So the gift of being an immigrant is that you straddle two cultures or three cultures
[Guest]: all the time.
[Guest]: And it forces you to compare which is a gift for a writer, because really writing is about
[Guest]: the best way to illustrate what you want to say to your reader, as you just did with Blaise
[Guest]: Pascal, is to compare or show the other.
[Guest]: The cost of being an immigrant is that you are always a Trishanku, you don't have roots.
[Guest]: So that is broadly been my life.
[Guest]: And I think it's helpful for me, because I grew up, till I moved to America at age 20,
[Guest]: I was a Chennai girl.
[Guest]: And as I know, from your previous podcast, but the Krisha show, for example, Chennai
[Guest]: is a very rooted city, it is conservative, it used to be when I was growing up, but that
[Guest]: was a gift, because it forced it gave you a certain set of parameters that were unchanging
[Guest]: and that you thought was true for the rest of the world.
[Guest]: So you go from that to America, where I lived for the next 18 years, or 18 years, Chennai,
[Guest]: 18 years America, where I was moving all around.
[Guest]: So I sometimes wonder, Amit, I went as a fresh off the board person and landed in Massachusetts
[Guest]: in a very liberal college.
[Guest]: And as a result, I became a Democrat by philosophy.
[Guest]: And I was just thinking, had I landed in Memphis or Georgia, would my philosophy and politics
[Guest]: have become Republican?
[Guest]: I have no answer to that.
[Guest]: But I think those are the kinds of questions that I asked is that, am I a democratic?
[Guest]: Am I liberal?
[Guest]: Because of where I landed.
[Guest]: And I think what happens when you are hungry to leave your hometown as I was, Chennai,
[Guest]: it was stifling to me, because I grew up in a fairly large family where everybody had
[Guest]: an opinion about how much oil I should put in my hair and how long the hair should be,
[Guest]: what I should eat, how I should dress, so I was ready to just flee.
[Guest]: And when you go and land as a tabula rasa, which I was, and so open, the influences,
[Guest]: you're like a child, you're like an infant, and the influences, they shape you and as
[Guest]: they shaped me.
[Guest]: I think my deep-rooted, sort of reflexive, taking up for the underdog, whoever the underdog
[Guest]: is of the moment, comes from my time in Massachusetts, which is very liberal and democratic and has
[Guest]: a strong social conscience.
[Guest]: My liberal politics, feminism, Mount Holyoke is one of the Seven Sisters.
[Guest]: So I went from a mother who said a woman is like a creeper, and you have to sort of creep
[Guest]: and bind yourself to your new family, to this place where feminism was argued, and I am
[Guest]: a feminist.
[Guest]: So I think for anyone who leaves home, whether within a country, like a lot of my friends
[Guest]: in Bangalore have come from the north or a different country, it forces you to take your
[Guest]: parents and your family and your community off that pedestal and see them for the people
[Guest]: with clay feet, people you love, but people with clay feet that they are, and it forces
[Guest]: you to question everything, and I think that is the point of going away from home.
[Guest]: And some of us take advantage of it, as I did, and some of us don't, and I think we
[Guest]: fear it.
[Guest]: We fear the change.
[Guest]: So a lot of Indians who went to America in the 60s and 70s became more Indian and became
[Guest]: more encapsulated within their culture, and I wasn't like that.
[Guest]: I didn't see the point of living abroad if you were not.
[Guest]: And being an artist helped, so my friends were gay people.
[Guest]: My closest friend was a lesbian who colored her hair purple, so okay, so if you don't
[Guest]: take the art, then it's no matter, but I think once you have a family, then there's a tendency
[Guest]: to go inward and kind of freeze yourself when you left India.
[Guest]: That's what happens to a lot of Americans.
[Guest]: After that, I moved to Singapore, which is a different sort of experience.
[Guest]: Singapore was a bubble.
[Guest]: It had the gift of three fantastic cooking cultures, which was the Arab cooking, the
[Guest]: Chinese cooking, and the Indian cooking.
[Guest]: So it had that, but other than that, living in Singapore as an immigrant was a bubble
[Guest]: life, and then I had a choice of moving to Chennai or Bangalore, but my husband could
[Guest]: not stand Chennai summers or the heat, so we ended up in Bangalore, which is a very
[Guest]: gentle, welcoming city, which is a city of immigrants, so I'm happy that I landed here.
[Guest]: So I think that being an immigrant forces you to examine and question constantly, which
[Guest]: is a state of dissatisfaction, really, most of your time, and for a person to live with
[Guest]: that angst is not a happy thing, but it helps with the writing.
[Amit Varma]: I'll take a detour here and point out something that I loved about your book, which is that
[Amit Varma]: it's full of so many light touches, it's got a conversational tone, and I was just reminded
[Amit Varma]: of that when you mentioned having gay friends and a lesbian friend, and there's a delightful
[Amit Varma]: anecdote in your book about how your lesbian friend was once accosted by another girl who
[Amit Varma]: wanted to convert her to Christianity and said, why don't you come out and talk with
[Amit Varma]: me for a couple of minutes, and your friend told that girl that I'll come out with you,
[Amit Varma]: but here's the thing, you know, either you'll save my soul or I'll seduce you.
[Amit Varma]: So I found that so kind of delightful, and your book is full of these light, charming
[Amit Varma]: moments that, you know, make a person LOL, so despite, you know, if any of my listeners
[Amit Varma]: are not interested in either food or faith, you can still have fun.
[Amit Varma]: So that's sort of your third F there for you.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of now go closer to the book, like, you know, you've described this book as a
[Amit Varma]: book about Hinduism written by a skeptical Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: Now before we talk about the book and about Hinduism, I want to talk about the skeptical
[Amit Varma]: Hindu, you know, in your afterward, you write about how quote, religion is an inheritance
[Amit Varma]: and a choice, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how it shifts from one to the other for you, like you've written
[Amit Varma]: about how as a teenager, you were an atheist, then agnostic in your 20s and 30s.
[Amit Varma]: And you turn to religion again, you know, later in life, so much so that in the introduction
[Amit Varma]: of this book, you wrote, quote, it defines who I am, perhaps not as much as feminism,
[Amit Varma]: and certainly not as much as being a writer or a mother, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this turns to unpack here.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll just ask you about religion and per se that, you know, what has been the role
[Amit Varma]: of religion in your life?
[Amit Varma]: And what's kind of, you know, just as you've made a physical homecoming by, you know, settling
[Amit Varma]: in India, it seems that your journey with regards to religion is also, you know, gradually
[Amit Varma]: come that kind of circle do not fully.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the role religion has played in your life and the different
[Amit Varma]: ways in which you think about it.
[Guest]: So my mother is what is called a Sri Vidya Upasaka, by which I mean she was, it's a feminine
[Guest]: goddess cult.
[Guest]: So I grew up with this, Amit, I grew up in a home, which was, she became this after my
[Guest]: brother and I left home, she said she caught hold of religion when her children left home.
[Guest]: Actually, that is a trajectory that many people will follow, because most people take to religion
[Guest]: when they get older.
[Guest]: I am similar in that.
[Guest]: So I'm not and the bell-shaped curve, I'm sort of in the middle.
[Guest]: In terms of the usefulness of religion, a long time ago, maybe two decades ago, there
[Guest]: was a cover story in Time magazine about religion and it made this case about how people who
[Guest]: had faith and it was largely Christian faith, because Time magazine was for the Western
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: And there was a whole slew of benefits that were listed out, you will have better marriages,
[Guest]: you will have better health, you will have better relationships within the community,
[Guest]: your immunity will be higher.
[Guest]: And again, these are narratives that keep coming up now, they say, if you keep a gratitude
[Guest]: journal, you will have this, this and this and this.
[Guest]: But I remember I was not part of the self-help genre, I was not paying attention to that.
[Guest]: So this really sort of caught me out of the blue and said, my God, if Time magazine says
[Guest]: religion is so great, I better start looking at it.
[Guest]: And I shelved it away and I just didn't pay attention.
[Guest]: But so you have two strands.
[Guest]: One is because perhaps because my mother was so deeply spiritual, I sort of rebelled against
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And then intellectually seeing the benefit of faith.
[Guest]: But then faith, as I have come to learn, is a self-experience.
[Guest]: It's not a cerebral experience, it is a visceral experience.
[Guest]: And I don't, I'm not there yet.
[Guest]: I think it would be wonderful to have that visceral experience where monks in the Kumbh
[Guest]: Mela have experienced transcendence, when they see the Ganga, they just, I mean, and
[Guest]: here we are saying, you know, in California, drugs have become legal.
[Guest]: Imagine if you can achieve that without drugs.
[Guest]: So that's what religion did for you.
[Guest]: And I've seen it time and time again in India.
[Guest]: Now, okay, so let's say I've come to a point where I admit faith as a, as an idea into
[Guest]: my life.
[Guest]: Which faith?
[Guest]: Buddhism and Hinduism are both seductive to me, monotheistic faiths don't attract me as
[Guest]: much.
[Guest]: Hinduism is a marvelous faith because of, it is a faith that still has not given up
[Guest]: its very ancient animistic roots, where rocks are worshipped, where trees, we have sacred,
[Guest]: Nandita Krishna has written this wonderful book on sacred trees and sacred groves.
[Guest]: You know, we are original tree huggers, we are the original rock worshippers and river
[Guest]: worshippers.
[Guest]: And that connects us not just to our own Vedic past, but to past in Egypt, where, you know,
[Guest]: the pyramids were built.
[Guest]: My father passed away recently and the death ceremonies that surround an Indian death are
[Guest]: very similar to sending off a pharaoh to the next life.
[Guest]: So we sent my father off with a cow image, with an umbrella, with slippers, with clothes,
[Guest]: with his favorite food.
[Guest]: I think that's so wonderful.
[Guest]: The rituals that I disdained as a child are so meaningful to me now that we are living
[Guest]: more and more in a world where we are, our life is shorn of meaning.
[Guest]: Life has been the vestiges of the rituals that connected us to milestones.
[Guest]: You know, African cultures, when a man reached a certain age would send them off to the hunt
[Guest]: and they would have these markings and tattoos on it.
[Guest]: We still have that, but we have forgotten them.
[Guest]: So if you admit faith as essential to your well-being, as I have come to believe, then
[Guest]: you have to choose your faith.
[Guest]: And as an adult, you can.
[Guest]: And I chose the faith that I was born into.
[Guest]: I haven't found enough to give it up.
[Guest]: And I like the fact that there are women goddesses, there aren't too many faiths in which there
[Guest]: are women goddesses.
[Guest]: I think that was a key element, which makes me like Hinduism.
[Guest]: And I specifically like the Hinduism of the left-handed path, as my mother would call
[Guest]: it, which is there in Bengal, which is there in Kerala, which is there in Nepal, when I
[Guest]: went to see the goddess.
[Guest]: The left-handed goddess tantric, it embraces what Carl Jung calls the shadow, which is
[Guest]: the quote-unquote, the so-called bad parts of yourself, the things that you suppress.
[Guest]: It embraces sacrifice, animal sacrifice, it embraces blood, wine, madhu, the goddess drinks
[Guest]: blood and wine.
[Guest]: It embraces all the things that have been sanitized out of, you know, the, how should
[Guest]: we call it, the middle path Hinduism.
[Guest]: So I like the left-handed path.
[Guest]: I like Chinnamasta, the tantric goddess who cut off her head and dances on corpses.
[Guest]: So the reason to embrace faith is intellectual for me.
[Guest]: The reason to embrace Hinduism is the marvelous variety and the fact that I am interested
[Guest]: in Carl Jung and dreams and transcendence and how to end the whole, you know, marijuana,
[Guest]: if you have to say it, and effects of it thereof.
[Guest]: And the fact that people in Bangalore are missing.
[Guest]: One of the most interesting things that I've attended recently is a firewalking ceremony.
[Guest]: And if you like, we can talk about that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we'll come back to it.
[Amit Varma]: There's so much to unpack here and this is what kind of fascinates me about everything
[Amit Varma]: that you've just said and which you've written about in your book is this notion of faith
[Amit Varma]: of the instrumental qualities of faith, where you point out that, you know, like you point
[Amit Varma]: to the Time magazine article that it can help us lead more fulfilled lives and we are happier
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth, thereby pointing out how, you know, faith is useful.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, faith is important because it is useful.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter if it's true or not, as long as it's useful.
[Amit Varma]: And this brings me to a very interesting thought because I often get semantic about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: atheism and agnostic people think of them as separate points on a continuum.
[Amit Varma]: But you can actually be atheist and agnostic at the same time because atheism has to do
[Amit Varma]: with belief and an atheist is someone who has an absence of belief.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't believe that there's no God.
[Amit Varma]: There's simply an absence of belief, you know, much as, you know, not collecting stamps is
[Amit Varma]: not a hobby.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, it's not a belief itself.
[Amit Varma]: It's an absence.
[Amit Varma]: And while atheism deals with belief, agnosticism deals with knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: And what it means is an agnostic holds a position that you cannot know whether there is a God
[Amit Varma]: or not.
[Amit Varma]: There is epistemic humility.
[Amit Varma]: So it is possible to be both an atheist and an agnostic if you look at it technically
[Amit Varma]: because you can both not believe and at the same time accept that there are some things
[Amit Varma]: you cannot know.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting addition to that is that besides being an atheist and an agnostic,
[Amit Varma]: you can now be a person of faith also because without believing and accepting that you cannot
[Amit Varma]: know, you can still embrace faith because of the utility it has in your life.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that sense that you're part of a community, the comfort that you get from
[Amit Varma]: these rituals and traditions, I mean, in fact, it again, just thinking aloud, it reminds
[Amit Varma]: me of a book by Steven Landsberg called The Big Questions, in which he says that most
[Amit Varma]: people who profess to believe in God actually don't believe in God.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they say they believe, but if it comes to the crunch, you know, so again, I
[Amit Varma]: mean, it seems to be coming from the way of thinking that, hey, religion is useful even
[Amit Varma]: if it isn't true.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of, you know, you've been to all these places, you mingled with
[Amit Varma]: all these religious people in the sense of this kind of balance between usefulness and
[Amit Varma]: belief.
[Guest]: What are your observations?
[Guest]: So I both agree and disagree with Karl Marx's statement about religion being the opiate
[Guest]: of the masses or the opium of the masses.
[Guest]: He was right.
[Guest]: It is actually, it has the benefit that of comfort and other worldliness that a drug
[Guest]: gives.
[Guest]: But what touched me was the way a devotee, the truly faithful, deals with God has nothing
[Guest]: to do with mass.
[Guest]: It's a very particular thing.
[Guest]: You know, I saw women in Palani doing Anga Pradashnam, where you roll around the temple
[Guest]: and saying Muruga, Muruga, and it was her, from her face, from her demeanor, from the
[Guest]: supplicancy with which she rolled, and from the eyes, which were tuned in with God, she
[Guest]: was not paying attention to the surroundings.
[Guest]: You could tell the fervor with which she believed that if she did this particular thing, that
[Guest]: her problem, whatever that specific problem was, whether it was son or a daughter being
[Guest]: sick would be solved.
[Guest]: So it is a connection, this sort of connection, I envy, you know, and I saw this countless
[Guest]: times.
[Guest]: I mean, mostly in South Indian temples, because I could tune in very quickly to the nuances
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: So you go to Ambalapura, the palpaisam was made for the God, and the priest would go
[Guest]: out every day and call out Vasudeva, Vasudeva three times.
[Guest]: And you're calling as if you're calling your son who is playing in the cricket field, and
[Guest]: I know you're writing a book on cricket to come back.
[Guest]: So it is a, it is a feat of imagination, and the word that is used by my mother is bhavna,
[Guest]: bhavana in Tamil.
[Guest]: So okay, so assume you're a skeptic like I am, why not cultivate faith just to improve
[Guest]: your imagination is the question I have.
[Guest]: I mean, I think there are many ways to do it, the art of drawing, there are books about
[Guest]: it, how to, and there are lots of people in the West who've made a fortune by teaching
[Guest]: you how to cultivate your creativity, but rituals are a great way where you can look
[Guest]: at a grain of rice and see a universe, you look at a stone and see the Shiva, the destroyer
[Guest]: of the universe, you hold the Nataraja pose in your Bharatanatyam, and then you become
[Guest]: that goddess as so many Bharatanatyam dances in Chennai demonstrate.
[Guest]: And the best Kathak, as my friend Madhu Nataraj in Bangalore tells me, some of the finest
[Guest]: Kathak choreographies or the creations were done by a Muslim Nawab, who pretended he was
[Guest]: Krishna and or Radha.
[Guest]: So these are feats, flights of fancy that will help you no matter what area of life
[Guest]: that you would like to be part of.
[Guest]: So there are two things I find that religion is about, you take it all down, so one is
[Guest]: bhavna or imagination, the other is sharanagati or self-surrender, self-surrender has to do
[Guest]: with, it's not about giving up on free will, it is about applying for a job at Apple or
[Guest]: Microsoft doing the best you can, and then you know having this faith which Ramanujan
[Guest]: the mathematical genius had is that something is beyond my spectrum that will help me, and
[Guest]: devotees have that, and usually they are down and out, usually somebody is sick, it is visiting
[Guest]: a temple is, if you see, if you go beyond the praying and everything, it is about being
[Guest]: caught in a quagmire of hopes and dreams, you stand in the temple, in any temple and
[Guest]: you're surrounded by murmuring people, and it's as if you are in a cloud of dream, fear
[Guest]: and hope, and they've all come to this one place to solve it, to solve their problems,
[Guest]: and if you are a feeling person like me, you will feel that, and then that's the transition
[Guest]: from cerebral to visceral, when and I truly believe what Diana said in all her books about
[Guest]: the sea of the yatra, yatra is a crossing, and the more you go, more you subjugate yourself,
[Guest]: the more you get rid of this ego mind, and get into the feeling mind, you will be touched,
[Guest]: and as I was, and it is a privilege to be touched in that way.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm very sort of intrigued by the role of both rituals and food in that, I mean food
[Amit Varma]: of course is a part of some rituals also, but you know, deep associations with each
[Amit Varma]: of these places, and we'll kind of talk about some of them, but what it kind of again strikes
[Amit Varma]: me is that, you know, again when I teach my writing course to go back to that, I'll often
[Amit Varma]: tell the people who participate that if you want to, you know, one useful hack in terms
[Amit Varma]: of building a routine is build a ritual around your writing.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, in the sense that you get up at the same time, you make a cup of coffee,
[Amit Varma]: you sit at the same place, you listen to the same playlist, and you're more likely to get
[Amit Varma]: into the writing groove.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for that is actually a scientific one, you know, neurologists would say neurons
[Amit Varma]: that fire together wire together.
[Amit Varma]: So when these things kind of come together, they can work together.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems that there is a deep truth there, which religion hit upon, because you have
[Amit Varma]: all of these things coming together, you have ritual coming together, you have food coming
[Amit Varma]: together, you have, you know, certain ways of doing things, different customs in different
[Amit Varma]: places like the Sufis in Ajmer may, you know, whirl and do all of those things, you have
[Amit Varma]: these separate, distinct rituals.
[Amit Varma]: And it therefore strikes me that it doesn't really matter whether there is a God or not,
[Amit Varma]: or whether you know what the religion holds out as facts are true or not.
[Amit Varma]: What is true is that all of these, they can come together and they can kind of put you
[Amit Varma]: in a particular state of mind, which can, as you so eloquently put it, make the whole
[Amit Varma]: experience visceral.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I was going to ask you earlier when you were talking about how food can be affected
[Amit Varma]: by how it's presented and everything around it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've mentioned at one point in your book that if you were asked, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you had one meal to have before you left the planet, what would you have?
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned breakfast in Haridwar, especially their samosas.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think part of the reason that food tasted so good to you is everything that was
[Amit Varma]: around it as well?
[Amit Varma]: You know, so are all these things also part of religion, that religion is not just about
[Amit Varma]: the bland fact of there being a God and everything associated with that, but all of these local
[Amit Varma]: things also play a part in that?
[Guest]: 100% Amit.
[Guest]: I think that this is why they say when we offer it to the God, we call it Naivedyam
[Guest]: and it becomes Prasadam or Prasad after the God has blessed it.
[Guest]: And 100% I believe the taste of the food, the divinity associated with it, the feeling
[Guest]: that what you are having is the God's blessing contributes to your well-being.
[Guest]: So I actually, after these trips of mine, I'm a little, I have started looking at this
[Guest]: notion of the energy around the food, energy around the cook a little bit more carefully,
[Guest]: haven't come to a conclusion yet, but I actually think there is something to the fact what
[Guest]: we Hindus have discovered in India and what the faithful have discovered in every state
[Guest]: is that the milieu surrounding the food and its preparation matter and it makes a difference.
[Guest]: And it is a subtle difference, perhaps we have lost the art of recognizing it, but I
[Guest]: have come to believe there is a difference and I am trying in small ways to figure out
[Guest]: experiments to figure out that difference.
[Guest]: But I wanted to add, I'm sure if you haven't done this already for your students, the Paris
[Guest]: Review interviews, which are available online for free, I'm sure you know them, but they
[Guest]: are great examples of the routines and superstitions that writers develop.
[Guest]: And one that stuck to my mind was of Ernest Hemingway, of course, is the great one who
[Guest]: wrote and when the writing was good, he would stop and then go out drinking and come back
[Guest]: the next day and work.
[Guest]: But the other one was, I think Dan Brown got these shoes that were anti-gravity shoes and
[Guest]: would sort of hang on the ceiling upside down as a writing ritual routine.
[Guest]: But that was for your students.
[Guest]: And yeah, and I think I've answered your other question about that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I know.
[Amit Varma]: That's fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I do cite the Writers at Work series, as you know, the Paris Review interviews were
[Amit Varma]: called to my students, I talk about the Hemingway interview also, because he said some really
[Amit Varma]: interesting things in that I haven't read the Dan Brown interview, but I now will.
[Amit Varma]: And this is probably a good time then to, you know, before we get down to the book,
[Amit Varma]: to talk about the craft of writing, like you are someone who's been a prolific columnist,
[Amit Varma]: you've kind of written all these years, you've also written a bunch of books.
[Amit Varma]: So what is kind of the process like?
[Amit Varma]: What is the column process like?
[Amit Varma]: Do you face writer's block?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have hacks to deal with it?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, how has you know, looking back over the years, how has sort of your craft
[Amit Varma]: evolved and the way you approach?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, let's talk about columns first, you know, can you can you give me some insight
[Amit Varma]: on that?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I'll go from the details to the broader one.
[Guest]: I actually believe in Hemingway's words, kill your darlings.
[Guest]: So then if you write a paragraph that you're very proud of, you need to look at it again.
[Guest]: And you need to kill your darling, by which he meant that when you fall in love with your
[Guest]: own writing, examine it with a little bit more critical eyes.
[Guest]: I also small things like don't use the same word in the same paragraph or within two or
[Guest]: three sentences.
[Guest]: The thesaurus should be your best friend, because you it will actually force you to
[Guest]: look at.
[Guest]: So if you're struggling for a word, look at it in thesaurus, it would it may enlighten
[Guest]: you on how to actually present it.
[Guest]: The beginning and the end are the most important aspects of a column, especially the end because
[Guest]: ideally, in this age of soundbite, think about coming up with a soundbite or one line soundbite
[Guest]: which encapsulates your column, that will be probably the most important sentence, right?
[Guest]: Like a poker player, don't reveal your hand all at once.
[Guest]: So a New York Times editor once told me that in the first paragraph, you're pretty much
[Guest]: written the whole essay, don't reveal your hand so much.
[Guest]: So do it gradually to do a little bit of zigzag to maintain the tension.
[Guest]: These are the things that all of us learn once you do it enough.
[Guest]: As far as my column, Raju Narasetty, who is known to both of us, described my column.
[Guest]: He was my first editor and he said it is being using the small everyday act to come up with
[Guest]: a big picture.
[Guest]: So that has been sort of how I approach column writing where you use simple things to come
[Guest]: up with a bigger philosophical, whether it's philosophical or a larger picture.
[Guest]: And that's how that's how I think and that's how I look view the column.
[Guest]: What do I do for that?
[Guest]: So there are many kinds of columnists.
[Guest]: You are one who links events to philosophy.
[Guest]: I am not an event to philosophy person, partially because I'm not a politics junkie like so
[Guest]: many columnists are in this country.
[Guest]: I am much more of a everyday thing, small things, linking it to bigger truth.
[Guest]: So that in that itself, there are two types of columnists.
[Guest]: If you would like to be Amit Verma type of columnist, I have no words for you.
[Guest]: If you would like to be a sort of a humorous, a little bit playful, again, what I said about
[Guest]: seeing the universe in a grain of sand type of columnist, I would say, first of all, when
[Guest]: you stand in a line, don't look at your smartphone, talk to people around you, whether when you're
[Guest]: going to buy fruit, try your best not to use after COVID, stop ordering on Amazon, actually
[Guest]: go out to your Monday and find people, because in order to write about life, as I do, you
[Guest]: have to engage with life.
[Guest]: And more and more these days, it's become very easy to sit at home and look at the computer
[Guest]: all day.
[Guest]: And the problem with that is that you won't get flashes of insight, which only come when
[Guest]: you're bored, when your mind is idle.
[Guest]: And you have to force yourself to give yourself that moment of idleness when you're not checking
[Guest]: your smartphone.
[Guest]: So I don't, I, for example, some, a few things I have done, I removed Facebook, Twitter,
[Guest]: all from my phone, I go through last phases of the month, when I disengage email, which
[Guest]: is easy to do if you have a smartphone, I mute WhatsApp messages.
[Guest]: So notifications, muting is a very important thing.
[Guest]: I love my phone.
[Guest]: So if you're addicted to checking your phone, as I am, at least mute the notifications,
[Guest]: whenever possible, forget your phone at home when you go out.
[Guest]: So these are ways in which you engage with the present when you engage with people, talking
[Guest]: to people is a good one.
[Guest]: Try to compartmentalize your life, so that you're writing time, do the Pomodoro, I use
[Guest]: the Pomodoro technique, which is 20 minutes without surfing the internet and stuff like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I used to have an app called Freedom, which is installed, where you basically shuts off
[Guest]: your computer and you can't open Chrome and nothing will happen.
[Guest]: So I have been known to do that.
[Guest]: Essentially the way I write a column and I did a weekly column for Mint was that be on
[Guest]: the lookout for an idea that is somewhat topical, because nobody cares about so essentially,
[Guest]: have attention for festivals that come up, have some notion of what's going on in the
[Guest]: world.
[Guest]: And tangentially be on the lookout for that idea.
[Guest]: And usually the idea would percolate, I would make notes longhand on A4 paper.
[Guest]: And because you're on deadline, I would sit down to write the column and pretty much finish
[Guest]: it in the span of a day, 800 words is easy to do in a span of a day, if you have enough
[Guest]: notes.
[Guest]: Sometimes there were times when there would be writer's block, but one study actually
[Guest]: helped me.
[Guest]: Study was examining the words of people who were forced to write and the words of people
[Guest]: who wrote when the muse was sitting on their shoulder.
[Guest]: So basically it got the control group of say 50 people and said, okay, right.
[Guest]: And then control the experimental group of 50 people who were told, okay, write when
[Guest]: you have the urge to write.
[Guest]: And the output was, there was no difference.
[Guest]: So I said, you know, I don't feel like writing, this is bad writing, all the negative narratives
[Guest]: that come into your head.
[Guest]: You just, I used to think of that study and said, you know what?
[Guest]: I may think this is stupid and bad, but the output when people look at it, guess what?
[Guest]: The study said there'll be no difference.
[Guest]: So that's how I forced myself to write.
[Guest]: So I think attention is the most important thing a writer has.
[Guest]: What you train your attention to focus on is priceless for a writer.
[Guest]: And to make it count, you know, focus attention on things that matter.
[Guest]: I mean, go to kacheris or go to concerts because guess what?
[Guest]: There are a few places when insight will strike.
[Guest]: Everybody says shower.
[Guest]: I get insight when I listen to Hindustani music or Carnatic music.
[Guest]: And I think the sitting back and letting your mind wander is a very special thing.
[Guest]: And you have to figure out ways to do that.
[Guest]: Whether you end up being a birdwatcher like me and standing in the balcony and looking
[Guest]: out or you're a runner, running, I mean, runners are a great way to figure out a way for you
[Amit Varma]: to be bored.
[Amit Varma]: This is all fantastic and very wise advice, you know, especially that bit about how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, if you're forced to write a lot, that will actually help you.
[Amit Varma]: Because the one thing that I keep saying is that what leads to excellence, iterations
[Amit Varma]: lead to excellence.
[Amit Varma]: You keep doing something again and again and again and again.
[Amit Varma]: And that's much more likely to happen if you force yourself to do it, rather than if you
[Amit Varma]: just sit around and wait for the muse to strike you, as you said.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, since you sort of now created this framework of Amit Verma kind of columnist
[Amit Varma]: and Shobhana Rai kind of columnist, I would just tell my readers that please don't be
[Amit Varma]: an Amit Verma kind of columnist because people who write about politics and economics do
[Amit Varma]: nothing to change the world.
[Amit Varma]: But being a Shobhana Rai kind of columnist gives you a shot at changing the way people
[Amit Varma]: live their lives in, you know, all the small pleasures, like some of the things you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out and indeed about eating food.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's time to talk about your book.
[Amit Varma]: But let's take a quick commercial break and come back after that.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indiancolors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists in India
[Amit Varma]: and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indiancolors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indiancolors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indiancolors.com, that's colors with an OU and make art a part of your
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: And for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Shobha Narayan about her delightful book Food and Faith.
[Amit Varma]: Shobha, we've spoken a lot about your personal journey before the break.
[Amit Varma]: And now as we come to the book, I'd like to sort of begin by asking you, how did you conceive
[Amit Varma]: of this book?
[Amit Varma]: Like you've written about food before in the past throughout your career.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've spoken about your sort of relationship with religion and how it gradually
[Amit Varma]: changed.
[Amit Varma]: But how did the idea for this particular book actually come about?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you decide to approach it?
[Guest]: So the food writing angel was Ruth Reichel, who sparked my career in food writing.
[Guest]: As far as the faith goes, about right after my first book, Monsoon Diary, which is called
[Guest]: a memoir with recipes had come out, an editor from India, Kamini Mahadevan, who used to
[Guest]: be with Penguin at that time, took me out for a coffee.
[Guest]: I was living in New York then.
[Guest]: And she said, you've written this book on food.
[Guest]: And Penguin has published it in India.
[Guest]: Why don't you write a book called Sacred Food?
[Guest]: And we'll come up with a list of temples and you will visit the temples and write about
[Guest]: the sacred food.
[Guest]: So this was 2003.
[Guest]: And it's taken me this long to come for the book to actually be finished because I was
[Guest]: moving continents and countries at that time.
[Guest]: So Kamini's vision of the book was largely Hindu and with Ajmer Dargah and a few others.
[Guest]: I pretty much stuck to her vision.
[Guest]: And the way that the logistics of it coming out was me pitching Sukumar at Mint and Siddhan
[Guest]: at Mint, saying I will write essays about this for Mint on Sunday, which was at that
[Guest]: time taking off.
[Guest]: So some of the chapters were published in Mint.
[Guest]: And then a lot of the other stuff was added on by me, the research and the Kumbh Mela,
[Guest]: for example, all that, the Nepal chapter.
[Guest]: So there were many chapters that were not written about for Mint before.
[Guest]: So that was how it came about.
[Guest]: And it was choosing the temples became a big dilemma.
[Guest]: For example, Tirupati Balaji temple's laddus are very, very famous.
[Guest]: And I chose not to include them because a lot had been written about them.
[Guest]: There's a Jain temple which serves Sukri Prasad.
[Guest]: So that was an obvious miss that was partly because for whatever reason, I couldn't visit
[Guest]: that temple.
[Guest]: And I believe that everybody says the God has to call you when I wasn't called.
[Guest]: So that was an obvious miss.
[Guest]: Parsi Prasad was, there was no way for it to be without seeming forced.
[Guest]: So that was a miss.
[Guest]: So that was how it happened.
[Guest]: So thanks to an editor.
[Amit Varma]: And what was your experience like of going to all of these temples, like some of them,
[Amit Varma]: like you pointed out when you were young and you were actually growing up in Chennai, you
[Amit Varma]: had visited some of these in the past because your family was fairly religious.
[Amit Varma]: But now you're visiting them again and looking at them in a different way.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, you know, one could, if there's a throng of people at the Kumbh Mela or at,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the Jagannath temple in Puri or wherever you are, one could actually shine
[Amit Varma]: a spotlight from on high on you and say that here's someone who's looking at all of this
[Amit Varma]: very differently from everybody else, that you're taking a step back, you're getting
[Amit Varma]: meta, you're trying to be descriptive, you know, you're focusing your attention, as it
[Amit Varma]: were.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process like, like as a writer who's writing about all of this, do you think
[Amit Varma]: about possible narratives in mind?
[Amit Varma]: Do you do pre-research and kind of go there?
[Amit Varma]: What are you looking at?
[Amit Varma]: What are you looking for?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that, yes, definitely a lot of pre-research in the choice of the temples and also how
[Guest]: to approach each temple, which was different.
[Guest]: India has this wonderful thing called Talapurana, which is the regional story of that particular
[Guest]: temple.
[Guest]: The problem with that is most of those books are available in situ.
[Guest]: You have to go there and most of them are in the regional language.
[Guest]: So I quickly discovered that it was hard to do that, the kind of internet research that
[Guest]: we do, because they are simply not available.
[Guest]: So when you go to Jagannath, there is a 10 volume set on the Jagannath Puri temple, not
[Guest]: available elsewhere.
[Guest]: You can't find it online.
[Guest]: Talapuranas of temples are written in Tamil in very slim volume.
[Guest]: So you have to end up.
[Guest]: So I started by saying a lot of pre-research will be done, but the research would be done
[Guest]: in the choice of the temple and in the planning of the trip, whether to plan it during a festival
[Guest]: or not, trying to find a contact in the temple, because we're going there for two, three days,
[Guest]: you'd want to speak to the priest, you would want to speak to the local scholar.
[Guest]: So the research was mostly logistical in finding experts in the place and then going there,
[Guest]: talking as much as possible to 10 different priests, 10 different scholars, usually somebody
[Guest]: from the board of trustees who happened to be a historian of that temple and then buying
[Guest]: as many books locally as was possible and then coming back and actually doing the research
[Guest]: and sifting through the mounds of the beauty is in religion is there is so much material
[Guest]: available in India because even the humblest of temples will have the Talapurana.
[Guest]: So then the question becomes, it's a curating job really, it's reading up on everything
[Guest]: and figuring out what is it that I want to say about all this, so that it doesn't end
[Guest]: up becoming another descriptive book on a Talapurana.
[Guest]: So the point of view became really important and so, but here's something I'll tell you,
[Guest]: if anyone in your listeners in your, I know you have a ton of listeners, if anyone in
[Guest]: your listenership is wondering about faith and they're saying, you know what, I'm 35
[Guest]: years old.
[Guest]: I've had a, I mean, I got laid off, I start up, whatever it is that I'm trying to figure
[Guest]: out if I have it in me to be become one of the faithful, I would say, give yourself an
[Guest]: experiment of visiting 10 temples in 2021 and doesn't matter which, choose a large temple,
[Guest]: ideally an ancient temple.
[Guest]: I will guarantee that it will raise questions in you.
[Guest]: I will guarantee that it will change you.
[Guest]: You may not end up faithful.
[Guest]: I am not as devout as I would like to be.
[Guest]: I think so, the experiment of visiting temples in sequence in a consistent way with discipline
[Guest]: will change you and I think it's a good experiment to do because places of faith are very special
[Guest]: because they have had imprints from hundreds of thousands of people who have come there
[Guest]: carrying fears, hopes and dreams, and you can say what you like, but that makes the
[Guest]: place sacred, that gives the place its gravitas, that is why it is a place of worship where
[Guest]: you speak with your soul and not with your head.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm kind of both atheist and agnostic and not that open to faith, but I would say this
[Amit Varma]: is terrific advice anyway, because I think, you know, and one gets sort of a rich feeling
[Amit Varma]: of this through your book that and I imagine anyone who does visit any of these temples,
[Amit Varma]: especially at a time when there are lots of pilgrims and so on, will, you know, get a
[Amit Varma]: better sense of the necessity and the impact of religion and maybe a deeper understanding
[Amit Varma]: into our culture and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think faith needs to necessarily be a part of that experience in terms of becoming
[Amit Varma]: faithful yourself.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, as an experience, I think it would be incredible.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing that I loved about your book, like when I first got your book, I have to
[Amit Varma]: be honest, I looked at all these chapters and they all have the names of these places.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, okay, she's gone to each of these places, she's going to describe the
[Amit Varma]: food.
[Amit Varma]: That's great.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to enjoy that.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't expect more, but I got much more.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I got is that through the book, you are sort of meditating on these
[Amit Varma]: deeper questions, which have often, you know, cropped up in my own thinking and some that
[Amit Varma]: haven't.
[Amit Varma]: So how I'd like to kind of structure the rest of this episode is examine some of these deeper
[Amit Varma]: questions first, and then we'll talk about these specific places and the mouthwatering
[Amit Varma]: food described there.
[Amit Varma]: Because if we talk about the food first, people might just go off to eat and who's going to
[Amit Varma]: listen to the rest of the episode.
[Amit Varma]: So my first big question, again, comes from, you know, something that you said right at
[Amit Varma]: the start, that you are becoming more of a Hindu in terms of, you know, Hinduism playing
[Amit Varma]: a part in your life, but you're also a feminist and that's a big part of who you are.
[Amit Varma]: And it's inescapable that so much of Hinduism, and of course, Hinduism contains multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: which also we'll discuss, it's, there are so many things that are so beautiful and deep
[Amit Varma]: and inspiring, but there are also so many mythogenistic elements to it.
[Amit Varma]: I recently reread Yuganta by Aravati Karve, which is a fabulous book about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: her feminist take of our epics.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also mentioned during this time that you've been traveling, that there are
[Amit Varma]: no women priests, and at various places, there are restrictions on what women can or cannot
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: How did you reconcile all of this for yourself?
[Guest]: Frankly, I haven't, I mean, the hypocrisies and the misogyny and the male predominance
[Guest]: in all Hinduism for sure, but every faith, you can't escape it.
[Guest]: I told you, my father passed on recently, and the priest, in an attempt to explain the
[Guest]: rituals to us, he said, our Vedas say, Kashiya Maranam Mukthihi, which I knew, you die in
[Guest]: Kashi, you will attain Mukthi.
[Guest]: And now, if you don't die in Kashi, what is the antidote to that?
[Guest]: Die in a place where your son is.
[Guest]: And I have two girls, and I'm a daughter, and I'm thinking, what about the daughter?
[Guest]: So it is, at every stage, and for example, the daughter is not supposed to do all the
[Guest]: cremation rites.
[Guest]: I have two girls, I hope they will do it for me.
[Guest]: And the certain mantra is called the Rudram, there is a japa, Rudram is a mantra, a very
[Guest]: famous Shaivite mantra.
[Guest]: I asked the priest, why do you say only males should chant the mantra?
[Guest]: Why can't a woman chant?
[Guest]: And he flips, he sort of said, he said it in Tamil, he said, Ningle Parvati Madri, you
[Guest]: yourself are like Parvati, why do you need to chant?
[Guest]: I didn't buy that.
[Guest]: So I am very attuned to the hypocrisy of faith.
[Guest]: I think religion is important, but the religious, the way, the closest, the people who have
[Guest]: high levels of religion, the pious, are full of pettiness and hypocrisy.
[Guest]: And it's hard to turn away from that.
[Guest]: And I really don't know how to wrap my head around it, Amit.
[Guest]: I think the only way to do it is that with everything that is great comes pettiness.
[Guest]: Picasso was a great painter, misogynist to the core.
[Guest]: Paul Gauguin is an impressionist giant, left his family in France, ran away to Tahiti.
[Guest]: Vincent van Gogh had madness in him.
[Guest]: So the only way to resolve it is to have this holistic view that life is this way and you
[Guest]: take the good and leave out the bad.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that I have been able to look away from the hypocrisy.
[Amit Varma]: And also what sort of you've pointed out at various points in time is through this book
[Amit Varma]: is the presence of caste.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you write about one temple where the Brahmins are eating separately.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about at one point the five great sins of Hinduism, which include killing a
[Amit Varma]: Brahmin.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you point out that like almost everything that has come about in the religion
[Amit Varma]: is kind of contextual.
[Amit Varma]: It was meant to be five rules for people who are living with their guru in the guru-shishya
[Amit Varma]: parampara.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there was, you know, one of the other rules was you shall not covet your
[Amit Varma]: guru's wife and extremely specific.
[Amit Varma]: And throughout the temples, as you described, you do see this, that there is sort of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Brahmins are elevated in this kind of a way.
[Amit Varma]: And again, this is one sort of, you know, ugly aspect that one can't help noticing.
[Amit Varma]: And I, you know, if any of my listeners are sort of wondering why I'm stressing on the
[Amit Varma]: negative aspects, these are just the two which struck me because they lead to cognitive dissonance
[Amit Varma]: and there are many other good things which we'll also talk about, including the food.
[Amit Varma]: Again, would your approach to this be the same as to the misogyny that, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: don't have to accept the whole, you know, there are some things which are wrong with
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So caste is a big topic in India, and I try to stay away from it in my book, but it's
[Guest]: hard to omit.
[Guest]: I think that the gift of being an immigrant, you know what, underneath, at the DNA level,
[Guest]: we are all the same.
[Guest]: I have a barbelled approach to this whole topic.
[Guest]: One is that I don't believe in, even in all this national identity and boundaries, at
[Guest]: the DNA level, we are all the same.
[Guest]: But I do believe now in what I have come to call the tribal identity, which is something
[Guest]: that is linked to rituals, it's linked to milestones of your life, it is linked to community,
[Guest]: and it can be your building community, it is not about, or your village, which is, so
[Guest]: it comes from this whole village notion of this is my community, but currently it's my
[Guest]: housing community.
[Guest]: So I believe that there is a place for community, but I also believe that we are one, I mean,
[Guest]: at the DNA level.
[Guest]: So then how does one reconcile with caste?
[Guest]: The way I actually was able to reconcile with the caste notions that predominates faith
[Guest]: and religion, what helped me was dealing with craftspeople in India.
[Guest]: I have a love of textiles, and I was going around for a website that I created called
[Guest]: Project Loom, where we documented handloom clusters.
[Guest]: And when you go to Kutch, and you talk to the weavers and the dyers, or when you go
[Guest]: to Kanchipuram and talk to the weavers and dyers, it is entirely caste-based, I mean,
[Guest]: they say it without any shade of judgment, there is none of the political overtones that
[Guest]: we associate with it.
[Guest]: It is, they do this type of embroidery in Kutch, they do this caste does this type of
[Guest]: embroidery, this caste is a dyer, this caste is, and I know Tamil words for it, but I forgot
[Guest]: the Gujarati words for it.
[Guest]: But I said, wow, their identity is linked to caste, and it is not about, I can sit in
[Guest]: an ivory tower in Bombay or Bangalore and say this is all wrong.
[Guest]: But we are a far, we are a long way off from destroying these segregations that have come
[Guest]: about so naturally for these craftspeople, and that, and they still live in that way.
[Guest]: So actually working with craftspeople is a way to wrap your head, as Laila Taibji has
[Guest]: done, as Archana Shah, who founded Bandej has done.
[Guest]: So they understand in a very intuitive, very easy way that this is how it is in India.
[Guest]: And the overtones that we give about the hierarchy that we give is absent there, it is kind of
[Guest]: a lateral thing.
[Guest]: So that is one way to resolve it in your head, if you are this really against this varnashrama,
[Guest]: as they call it, as I am.
[Guest]: So that's a good way.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great episode on this with TM Krishna, which I'll link from the show notes for all
[Amit Varma]: my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Coming on to something, you know, that I do sort of deeply admire about the culture of
[Amit Varma]: this country, which I guess, in a sense, you can call Hinduism also, because it can just
[Amit Varma]: mean so many other things, which is the incredible diversity.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things you point out is not just diversity in the traditional sense that
[Amit Varma]: we have, you know, so many thousands of gods, just like the biggest buffet ever, you choose
[Amit Varma]: your God, depending on what your proclivity is.
[Amit Varma]: But also, this is not just a diversity across space, it's also a diversity across time.
[Amit Varma]: Like you point out that, you know, we have these animistic traditions which survive these
[Amit Varma]: paganistic traditions that survive.
[Amit Varma]: It's like, you know, the last 30 centuries of, you know, this subcontinent's evolution
[Amit Varma]: and religious terms all exist till today in religion.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also seen, you know, different aspects of this in the same place.
[Amit Varma]: It's not that Puri is just one kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: You point out about Puri that the origin myths of Puri go to Jainism, Buddhism, to different
[Amit Varma]: sects of Hinduism, everyone's got a different origin story.
[Amit Varma]: That's so incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about your experience, because at an intellectual level, we of course know
[Amit Varma]: that the diversity is out there.
[Amit Varma]: But you experienced it at a visceral level as well.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So the incredible thing about India, but if you look at it through my lens, is that gods
[Guest]: still roam the earth.
[Guest]: And I mean that quite literally.
[Guest]: I mean, men and women dressing themselves as gods and taking part in a procession.
[Guest]: If you go to the other great hotbeds of civilization, which came up with philosophies and ideas
[Guest]: and invented faiths, Egypt, for example, Greece, for example, if you go to Greece, nobody prays
[Guest]: to Zeus.
[Guest]: Nobody prays to Athena or Apollo or Aphrodite.
[Guest]: They have all but disappeared.
[Guest]: Greece has cut itself off from its past that was so powerful.
[Guest]: I mean, it shaped Western civilization.
[Guest]: But you go there now and that country has just cut itself off from that past.
[Guest]: You go to Egypt, which was the sort of the fertile crescent where Egypt, the rivers Nile
[Guest]: and Euphrates were the seat of where it all began.
[Guest]: But you go there, Ra or Horus or any of those gods absent.
[Guest]: And the way Egypt, if you go to Cairo, they have shorn themselves of their past.
[Guest]: India happily, we still wear the clothes that our forefathers wear, that you now only see
[Guest]: in the Museum of Metropolitan Art, all the robes.
[Guest]: We still have traditions which continue and rituals and superstitions and links to seasons
[Guest]: that so in that sense, the long arc of civilization has not ended in India.
[Guest]: The narrative continues.
[Guest]: We are not at the last chapter, whereas Greece, what happened was they had their chapters
[Guest]: as views, everything cut.
[Guest]: And now you have Harry Potter, this, that, and the other.
[Guest]: It is a chasm in the middle, whereas in India, it is a gentle arc.
[Guest]: And to quote Martin Luther, the arc is long and I think it will bend towards justice even
[Guest]: in our current political cauldron.
[Guest]: So I am very proud of India that all our faiths together have figured out a way not to cut
[Guest]: ourselves from the past.
[Guest]: The sacred and the profane live concomitantly in India.
[Guest]: We have not cut ourselves from that.
[Guest]: So that's wonderful.
[Guest]: And you see that everywhere.
[Guest]: I was talking about this firewalking ceremony, which touched me so deeply.
[Guest]: It happens in Shivaji Nagar, which has one of the most powerful churches in Bangalore
[Guest]: is there and the feast happens there.
[Guest]: It is largely occupied by Muslim merchants.
[Guest]: And the Hindu group, what happens was the goddess comes into a man on a new moon night.
[Guest]: He dresses himself in a fabulous Kanchipuram saree.
[Guest]: He believes he is the goddess.
[Guest]: He wears lipstick, he wears makeup and turmeric on the face.
[Guest]: And he walks around the neighborhood collecting money.
[Guest]: And there is a group that follows him, he included, religious fervor builds up.
[Guest]: And then we all end it with him walking over fire and a lot of dancing and shaking and
[Guest]: ecstatic devotees walking behind him.
[Guest]: And then inside the house where he enters, there is a mound of meat.
[Guest]: And this goddess, he calls himself Angala Parameswari, which is a very old tribal goddess
[Guest]: before Saraswati Lakshmi, all that came about.
[Guest]: And he takes arms full of the meat and puts it into his mouth and distributes it to his
[Guest]: devotees.
[Guest]: So, this is like, I don't know, a Tolkien book or some sort of a Steven Spielberg fantasy
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: Man dressing as a woman, you have the cross dressing and all the things that my daughter
[Guest]: talks about now as being politically relevant, the him, his, the gender, everything is contained
[Guest]: in this.
[Guest]: So, how can you tell me that this religion as it is practiced in India is not relevant
[Guest]: to the questions of our time?
[Guest]: If a man can become a woman for one night, if a human can become a god for one night,
[Guest]: if you can convince yourself to walk over fire and then nothing happens to you.
[Guest]: If you can serve meat as an offering, as a prasadam in this whole vegetarian mafia country
[Guest]: that we've sometimes become, it's all there, you just need to know where to find it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'm non-vegetarian, so armfuls of meat sounds really nice to me.
[Amit Varma]: Talking about a different kind of diversity, which is food diversity and which is another
[Amit Varma]: sort of a positive impact of all these different sort of temples and the cultures that they
[Amit Varma]: preserve.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point in your wonderful chapter on Puri, which was one of my favorite chapters
[Amit Varma]: from your book, you write, quote, it is easy to be flippant or cynical about temple food,
[Amit Varma]: the same list of dishes cooked in the same way over centuries, feeding masses of people
[Amit Varma]: via the Lord.
[Amit Varma]: What other virtue does it have?
[Amit Varma]: An important one has to do with the preservation of indigenous seed varieties.
[Amit Varma]: At the Jagannath temple, for instance, one of the offerings is made with green paddy.
[Amit Varma]: For green paddy to be available throughout the year, specific seed varieties that ripen
[Amit Varma]: at different times must be grown around the temple.
[Amit Varma]: At the very least, this promotes biodiversity.
[Amit Varma]: India used to have one lakh varieties of rice.
[Amit Varma]: Today, most of us eat basmati and in the south, sona masuri rice.
[Amit Varma]: Temple kitchens specifically choose local and indigenous varieties of rice, such as
[Amit Varma]: matta and jawara, I hope I'm pronouncing that right, red rice and parboiled, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this reminds me of something that, you know, the Vikram doctor, when he was did an
[Amit Varma]: episode with me a couple of years back, spoke about Cavendish bananas, very, you know, spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how we imported bananas out to the US and then they sent us back this homogenized
[Amit Varma]: version of the banana called Cavendish bananas, which is spread everywhere because of reasons
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, economies of scale and marketing and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And all the local varieties are drying up.
[Amit Varma]: But then it strikes me that when one speaks of all these temple cultures and the food
[Amit Varma]: that is around them, you know, one, they evolved to make use of local produce, because back
[Amit Varma]: when you could not travel so much, that's all that you had.
[Amit Varma]: And two, therefore, by becoming ossified and ossification is generally a bad thing and
[Amit Varma]: I'll come to that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But by becoming ossified, we are actually preserving the sort of food diversity of our
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: Is there something to this?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think religion also plays a part in a sense of keeping something alive, something
[Amit Varma]: good like food diversity, which would not otherwise have been the case?
[Guest]: Not just food, Amit, cultural traditions, the clothes we wear to temples are mostly
[Guest]: sarees.
[Guest]: I mean, nowadays, where does somebody who loves handloom sarees, where do young women
[Guest]: wear sarees to the temple and for weddings?
[Guest]: So Yakshagana is preserved in temple festivals in Uttarakhand Nataka.
[Guest]: David Shulman wrote this wonderful essay for the New York Review of Books on the Kudiyattam,
[Guest]: which happened in temple premises where you create the universe and destroy it in 31 days.
[Guest]: So this is a play that goes over 31 nights and it happens in temples.
[Guest]: So temples are cauldrons of culture and tradition.
[Guest]: And I think we who have become sanitized and removed from our faith have forgotten that
[Guest]: along with the hypocrisy and along with this preaching and becoming religious, they are
[Guest]: the ones who are preserving, as you say, the food.
[Guest]: The Parni Panchamritam uses a particular type of banana called Malavarapram, which is, as
[Guest]: you said, not found.
[Guest]: You have elaki bananas in Bangalore.
[Guest]: You don't get that.
[Guest]: But thanks to that temple, if you visit Parni, you will still get bananas that are indigenous
[Guest]: and local.
[Guest]: And the Ambalapura Palpaisam uses the parboiled rice.
[Guest]: And so temples, I think, or places of faith, preserve music, preserve dance, preserve textiles
[Guest]: and rituals and food.
[Guest]: So yes, I think that we should not throw the baby out of the bathwater in our attempt to
[Guest]: become agnostic.
[Guest]: We forget all the good things they've done as well.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is really about a cultural difference between countries like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: religion can play the same role in all our lives.
[Amit Varma]: You know, back in the day, it probably originated as a God of the gaps, whatever you don't understand,
[Amit Varma]: you use religion to explain it.
[Amit Varma]: And over time, you understand more and more it, you know, all over the world, you know,
[Amit Varma]: religion plays the role of sort of, you know, forming communities where people find comfort
[Amit Varma]: and you know, the good aspects of being part of a tribe.
[Amit Varma]: But there's something about India that's different now, I'll, for a moment, I'll take you back
[Amit Varma]: and this is a diversion.
[Amit Varma]: So I used to be a professional poker player once.
[Amit Varma]: And I would spend a fair bit of time in Macau where I would go to play tournaments.
[Amit Varma]: And Macau, by the way, I think about 15 years ago, overtook Las Vegas as the biggest gambling
[Amit Varma]: destination in the world, partly because the Chinese love to gamble.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember on a weekday afternoon, I went to the Venetian there.
[Amit Varma]: And the Venetian in Macau is not only built to be a replica of the one in Vegas, but it
[Amit Varma]: is the largest gaming floor in the world, right, there are rows and rows and rows of
[Amit Varma]: slot machines and all of that happening.
[Amit Varma]: And I went there on a weekday afternoon, and the place was packed.
[Amit Varma]: And it was old Chinese pensioners who are standing at the slot machines, and they're
[Amit Varma]: sitting there for hours and hours and hours, and they're gambling, gambling, gambling,
[Amit Varma]: gambling.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a big part of the culture there.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if anyone from China is listening to this, I hope I'm not simplifying I'm just
[Amit Varma]: sharing an experience and not saying that all the Chinese are necessarily like this.
[Amit Varma]: But I got reminded of this when I read this passage in your book, where in your chapter
[Amit Varma]: on Udupi, you write, quote, the elderly in China play mahjong, American senior citizens
[Amit Varma]: go on cruises and play golf, Europeans visit museums, tour wineries and dine at Michelin
[Amit Varma]: star restaurants, Indian elders visit temples, stop code and elsewhere in your book, you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about how people often have this urge towards the end of their lives that they want
[Amit Varma]: to die in Kashi, you know, tell me a little bit about this, because this does to an extent
[Amit Varma]: seem something that is much more an Indian thing than, you know, is it because we have
[Amit Varma]: less sources of comfort and solace and so on, because not many of our elders can go
[Amit Varma]: around on luxury cruises and dining in Michelin star restaurants like European elders may
[Amit Varma]: be able to do, you know, it seems that in this sense, the role of religion is so
[Amit Varma]: much deeper here than elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that's true?
[Guest]: So I have a theory, and I don't know if it's true, Amit.
[Guest]: I have a theory that it is because of the trajectory of our economy that we are in,
[Guest]: that religion still holds sway.
[Guest]: And I wonder if we become richer, like, say, China or Taiwan or Japan, whether wealth
[Guest]: will engender us to forget the God, because I think you have to be in some senses a developing
[Guest]: country for religion to take hold.
[Guest]: So that is my macro theory is that the reason religion holds sway in India in the way it
[Guest]: does has to do with the economic trajectory that or the point in the economic trajectory
[Guest]: that we are in.
[Guest]: Once our GDP goes up, and once we become, like, say, Japan, perhaps we will forget faith
[Guest]: as many rich countries have forgotten, and we will find other inventions that seek to
[Guest]: soothe us.
[Guest]: So that's my answer to that, yeah.
[Guest]: And I think it has more to do with economics than to do with geography.
[Guest]: It has to do with the time on the graph, where we are at that point in the graph.
[Guest]: And I think Europe used to be like that.
[Guest]: Every country in the, that had, if you follow the economic trajectory of every country,
[Guest]: I feel, and again, this is my theory, that there were points in that economic trajectory
[Guest]: where the countries were deeply devout and religious.
[Guest]: As they became wealthier, they lost, they gave up their faith, and they became more
[Guest]: scientific, they became more rational, and they found money served as well as a God as
[Guest]: religion did in their past.
[Guest]: So India is still not there yet.
[Amit Varma]: No, I have spent far more time in casinos and in temples, but I sincerely hope that
[Amit Varma]: our elderly don't go from temples to slot machines, you know, that would just be horrifying,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which might have kind of happened elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is about the commercialization of religion, which you've written at in separate
[Amit Varma]: parts of your book, like at one point in your chapter on Palani, you know, you write about
[Amit Varma]: how the way, you know, devotees are treated, and it's such an organized setup and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you write, quote, I have tried long and hard to make my peace with
[Amit Varma]: the hierarchical structure of Hinduism and indeed all religions, perhaps I should just
[Amit Varma]: bring them down from the pedestal, bring them down from the realm of the divine to the realm
[Amit Varma]: of the commercial, view them as a spectacle, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And much later in your chapter on Jaipur, you write, quote, I haven't figured out my
[Amit Varma]: stance with respect to offerings for God, flowers will get crushed, sweets will aid
[Amit Varma]: and abet India's rising number of diabetics.
[Amit Varma]: And really does the God partake of all this stuff, the offerings of money, clothes, food
[Amit Varma]: or flowers end up in the pockets of the priest or the temple.
[Amit Varma]: So why do we persist carrying these objects as an offering to God when he doesn't need
[Amit Varma]: a thing and only wants us to be pure of heart, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll point out to all my listeners that it is Shobha who use the pronoun he for God.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't do that.
[Guest]: I always reflexively say she just to be on the safe side.
[Guest]: Good one, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So it's just something that like, I realized that there was a lot about this experience,
[Amit Varma]: especially the food and the sort of, you know, the other almost mystical experiences, which
[Amit Varma]: were amazing.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you are viewing and writing about and commenting on all this crash
[Amit Varma]: commercialization that's happening in a separate part of the book you write about.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I think during the Kumbh Mela chapter, you write about how everything in Haridwar
[Amit Varma]: is.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a set up for the tourists.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll have an, you know, an American and a Swiss and whatever, and there'll be people
[Amit Varma]: giving them Gyan and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Does this commercial aspect of this whole religion thing disturb you a bit?
[Amit Varma]: Because you have true believers flocking to places which may, for all you know, not be
[Guest]: manned by true believers at all.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Very good question.
[Guest]: But does Subodh Gupta deserve to be India's millionaire artist?
[Guest]: There are countless, does Vasudev Gaitonde deserve to sell for how much he sell for much
[Guest]: after his death?
[Guest]: So if you are an artist, as I was trained to be, commercialism is always a very, a stepmother,
[Guest]: and you always view it with suspicion, stepfather, view it with suspicion.
[Guest]: So that said, so I will answer it in two ways.
[Guest]: One is that anything that we consider pure and otherworldly comes with commercialization
[Guest]: that we will always have trouble dealing with.
[Guest]: And I use that as a very specific example to point that out.
[Guest]: There are countless deserving artists who don't achieve the stature that all these so-called
[Guest]: name-brand artists do.
[Guest]: So how do you make your peace with that?
[Guest]: The great thing, and this is true with art, and this is true with temples, is that even
[Guest]: today you can go to Bhubaneswar in Orissa, you can go near a river and you will find
[Guest]: a small Yogini shrine with nobody there, not even a priest.
[Guest]: And I have visited the shrine which was destroyed.
[Guest]: And you can commune with the divine in silence and solitude.
[Guest]: That is available to you.
[Guest]: Even today in Kerala, you can go to temples where there is a priest, there is no hierarchy,
[Guest]: there is no money grabbing.
[Guest]: And so then the question becomes, do you visit the rock star temples of Tirupati, Haridwar,
[Guest]: Badrinath, Dwaraka, the name-brand temples, or do you forget them?
[Guest]: I would say if you are likely uncomfortable with the commercialization of temples, just
[Guest]: don't go to those temples.
[Guest]: Don't put your rupees as part of their coffers.
[Guest]: Don't visit the big temples that have countless tourists anyway.
[Guest]: So then the next level becomes, if you also believe like Diana Ek wrote about in her book
[Guest]: that pirthas or places of worship carry energy and part of the pilgrimage is to experience
[Guest]: this energy and perhaps get healed by it, that's the purpose of going to that big temple,
[Guest]: the Guruvayur, the Kumbh Mela, and everything is to get your energy and your healing from
[Guest]: your energy that's found.
[Guest]: So like with art, you choose your battles and you do, you choose what you, if you are
[Guest]: sick, if you want to be healed by, from God forbid, a cancer, and by all means go follow
[Guest]: your faith, if your mom tells you go visit Guruvayur, go and get the healing energy from
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But if you just want to commune with the divine, I mean, as lovers of podcasts, Amit, including
[Guest]: yours, I'm sure you have listened to Sam Harris's podcast, and how can you explain meditation?
[Guest]: It is a felt experience, it's not hard to articulate.
[Guest]: So if you want to just have the felt experience, go to Bhuvaneshwar, see the Yogini temple,
[Guest]: go to Maharashtra, every village outside the Bombay, small shrines where nobody will bother
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: So you can experience the non-commercial aspect of faith, if you want to.
[Guest]: And in fact, you may experience faith in those non-commercial shrines, the roadside in Nashik,
[Guest]: where there is a shivling and a beautiful banyan tree, you go sit there and experience
[Guest]: the wind, and you may be touched in a way that you can't articulate.
[Guest]: And that, to me, is an experience of the divine.
[Guest]: And the beauty is that wherever you are, you can access it.
[Guest]: Even in Italy, where Christianity played such a huge role, and all the Baroque images of
[Guest]: Christ are now in the museums.
[Guest]: You go to Florence, you can go to the museum, or you can go to those giant cathedrals in
[Guest]: the Vatican, or you can go to a small church, listen to the West First singing and be touched
[Guest]: by it.
[Amit Varma]: So there's such wisdom in that, you know, being able to relate to religion in all our
[Amit Varma]: personal ways.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Sam Harris.
[Amit Varma]: I should point out to my listeners that I'm, by the way, a big fan of his podcast.
[Amit Varma]: I think I, you know, he's again a master of the craft of the interview, whatever one might
[Amit Varma]: think of his views otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: But I actually downloaded his meditation app, I think it's called the Waking Up app, and
[Amit Varma]: it's a subscription thing.
[Amit Varma]: And I've been paying for it for the last five months, but haven't actually sat down for
[Amit Varma]: a single session.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like you take a gym membership for a year, and then you never go.
[Amit Varma]: Just as his writer's block, I guess as meditators block.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of my last big question before we get to the food, though, I'll obviously keep
[Amit Varma]: throwing up tangential questions, even when we talk about the food.
[Amit Varma]: But this last big question is about, you've spoken throughout your book, and it's a truism,
[Amit Varma]: almost a cliche that Hinduism contains so much, there is so much within it.
[Amit Varma]: But what we have seen in the last few years and building up over the last few decades
[Amit Varma]: is political Hinduism, or what is called Hindutva today, which is a very strident version of
[Amit Varma]: Hinduism, which almost tries to mimic sort of the Abrahamic one book approach.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and it's strident, it's full of certainties.
[Amit Varma]: It's also built on negatives instead of a positive view of what the world should be
[Amit Varma]: like.
[Amit Varma]: It's built on negatives like, you know, no love jihad, don't slaughter cows, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And some of their political grievances might well be legitimate, but a lot of what they
[Amit Varma]: stand for is having a toxic effect on our society.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of feelings on what's happening out there?
[Amit Varma]: And should Hindus be outraged at what is being done in the name of Hinduism?
[Guest]: I think you should.
[Guest]: I am certainly.
[Guest]: And the problem in India now, and I have a friend who's the resident editor of Times
[Guest]: of India in Bangalore, and she was saying that families in India are being thrown apart
[Guest]: because of what is happening.
[Guest]: So you have the mother who says Jai Shri Ram and the Babri Masjid, the judgment was passed,
[Guest]: and you have the daughter who's horrified by the same judgment.
[Guest]: It didn't used to be like that.
[Guest]: I think what is happening currently is that when you promote faith over national identity,
[Guest]: it is a very slippery slope, and I personally think it is a very dangerous thing what we
[Guest]: are doing.
[Guest]: I think what I say in the book is a question, and if I can read it out, I would, Amit, is
[Guest]: what that parliamentarian in Goa said, that he's a devout Hindu, but inside his house,
[Guest]: but outside he's an Indian first and a Hindu last.
[Guest]: That's how it is.
[Guest]: I feel that's a good way to view religion.
[Guest]: Faith is private.
[Guest]: Faith may happen in temples and churches and mosques and public, but in a sense, what are
[Guest]: you after at the end of the day?
[Guest]: You want to connect with the divine.
[Guest]: You want to connect with your God, Jesus, Allah or Ram, and why are you making, why
[Guest]: are you drawing your community and warrior craft and spacecraft into this?
[Guest]: What should be a very private, solemn, sacred act?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you said, you know, Jesus, Allah, Ram, and that immediately reminded me of another
[Amit Varma]: sort of question that I had for you.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask it now, which is that, you know, the thing in Hinduism is that there are so
[Amit Varma]: many deities to choose from, and indeed, there are deities spread across this book.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, you speak about your experiences in the US, where, you know, there was this
[Amit Varma]: fight between South Indians and North Indians about which deity to have for the temple,
[Amit Varma]: and the only one they could actually agree on was Ganapati.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking about all the different choices open to you, there's Ram, Vishnu,
[Amit Varma]: Shiva, Ganesha, Ganapati, Lakshmi, Durga, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that the way that you choose a favorite deity, like apart from it coming
[Amit Varma]: down to you, like a football club, loyalty often comes down to some people.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, if you actually choose it, it sort of strikes me that it reveals
[Amit Varma]: something about the chooser much in the same way that we choose who is our cricketing hero.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, my cricketing hero being Rahul Dravid, for example, will no doubt reveal
[Amit Varma]: something about me, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So which deity do you feel most drawn to?
[Amit Varma]: And why do you think that is?
[Guest]: Kali.
[Guest]: Very easy.
[Guest]: Kali Ma, because I think she's dark in a country that worships fairness.
[Guest]: She embraces her shadow in a way that Lakshmi and Saraswati and all the goody-goody gods
[Guest]: don't.
[Guest]: She's more tribal and links to the fertility goddesses of yore.
[Guest]: So she connects us to who we were as a civilization.
[Guest]: And she's a fierce warrior goddess.
[Guest]: So I love that.
[Guest]: I love the female warrior goddesses.
[Guest]: And so I have to go to the Northeast, which I have not done.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe a separate book on that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now talk about some of the places that you visit through the book, not all of them,
[Amit Varma]: because we do want people to kind of buy the book, which they should anyway, because I
[Amit Varma]: don't think a podcast episode, however long, can capture more than a sliver of it.
[Amit Varma]: But your first chapter is on Udupi, and of course, we all associate Udupi with the cuisine
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by your beautiful description of the classic iconic masala dosa as, quote,
[Amit Varma]: having a, quote, sly feeling to stymie orthodox Brahmin priests, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So can you elaborate on what the feeling of the masala dosa has to do with fighting Brahmanism?
[Guest]: Yeah, sure.
[Guest]: So this I got from a book by Geeta Rao, it is on Udupi cuisine.
[Guest]: Basically, what happens was orthodox Brahmins are not allowed to eat onion.
[Guest]: So they wanted, so the plain potato filling was kept outside.
[Guest]: And they would eat their dosa and almost dip in the potato filling like a chutney.
[Guest]: But they wanted onions.
[Guest]: So these priests, they figured out a way to slyly have their cake and eat it too, or have
[Guest]: their onion and eat it too.
[Guest]: So they made this masala filling with onions, and then they would fold it into the dosa
[Guest]: so that they could piously eat this, thinking that nobody knows that they are eating onions.
[Guest]: So that was how that was invented, according to the research I did.
[Guest]: And I love the idea of it.
[Guest]: And now, of course, Udupi masala dosa has become a global commodity.
[Guest]: It's a GI tag, I'm sure.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so all casteist people listening to this will now be forced to stop eating masala
[Amit Varma]: dosas, if you are true to whatever your ideals are.
[Amit Varma]: And I was fascinated by, you know, the description of how basically, you know, there are eight
[Amit Varma]: spiritual centers in Udupi who run the temple two years at a time.
[Amit Varma]: And during the transition, they do what is called Anna Brahma, where they feed, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 15,000 people, which is quite mad.
[Amit Varma]: And you've described their delicacy as being brinjal cooked in coconut oil, which is one
[Amit Varma]: of their specialties.
[Amit Varma]: And I was kind of amused by this, because on the one hand, you point out how they don't
[Amit Varma]: want to use foreign ingredients.
[Amit Varma]: So everything has to be local and sanskari, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, they're cooking this with red chilies, which come from Mexico,
[Amit Varma]: and sesame seeds, which, you know, went from Indonesia to China, and then to India.
[Amit Varma]: And that irony sort of amused me of how, you know, it is impossible to be a purely Indian
[Amit Varma]: in that sense in any way.
[Guest]: Except in shraddh cooking, Amit, I think that if you look at the death rituals around what
[Guest]: they call the shraddham, or the shraddh, I think, even today, the funerary rites, and
[Guest]: I discussed this with a scholar, actually, the funerary rites in Hinduism are better
[Guest]: preserved than the marriage rites, for example, or the other life stages, right?
[Guest]: Because people are afraid of the booths and the pisachas that we become.
[Guest]: And so this element of fear forced them, the priests and the Brahmins who were in charge
[Guest]: of passing it from generation to generation to preserve the cooking associated with all
[Guest]: these death rituals, not so much with the, as you say, the temple cooking even was diluted.
[Guest]: And certainly marriage food, at one point had certain prescriptions, which are no longer
[Guest]: valid in this day where we have stalls with pav bhaji in Indian and South Indian temples.
[Guest]: But funerary cooking is still preserved in the original form.
[Amit Varma]: And another thing to strike me, and this is sort of a profound observation, you make a
[Amit Varma]: different points in the book, and it seems to me to be true of religion, fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: that all rituals that evolve for specific local reasons, but then are given a veneer
[Amit Varma]: of morality or myth, for example, at one point, you point out how, again, I'll quote from
[Amit Varma]: your chapter, quote, traditional Hindus in Udupi don't eat certain foods during the four
[Amit Varma]: monsoon months, a tradition of abstinence that seems at odds in this age when New Zealand
[Amit Varma]: apples and Malta oranges are airlifted to every region of India.
[Amit Varma]: They call this chaturmasya vrat.
[Amit Varma]: The phrase means four month austerity, and perhaps began out of necessity.
[Amit Varma]: You have to hunker down in one place during the monsoon, and certain foods would simply
[Amit Varma]: not have been available.
[Amit Varma]: The protocol itself seems rather strict and forbidding, but intuitive once you get used
[Amit Varma]: to it, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, you talk about the myth that built around it, where you say, quote, Narada
[Amit Varma]: asked Brahma, the creator, about the importance of the chaturmasya vrat.
[Amit Varma]: Brahma said, and now this is these are Brahma's words.
[Amit Varma]: So quote, chaturmasya is a period of four months during which Lord Vishnu is believed
[Amit Varma]: to take rest in the Sheet Sagar or Milky Ocean.
[Amit Varma]: So quite naturally, all the oceans, rivers and ponds are believed to attain divinity
[Amit Varma]: due to the presence of Lord Vishnu during this period.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that seems to crop up in different parts of your book, where different
[Amit Varma]: things evolve in the religion because of what are local factors, but then almost as if to
[Amit Varma]: rationalize them and why they are part of the religion, all these myths and all kind
[Amit Varma]: of get built around.
[Amit Varma]: So is this a pattern you started noticing more and more while writing the book and you
[Guest]: know?
[Guest]: Yeah, 100%.
[Guest]: And the biggest example of that, of course, Amit is the gods that were originally worshipped,
[Guest]: which was Indra, the god of thunder.
[Guest]: So every faith, even the choice of gods to worship is a pattern.
[Guest]: Every faith was invented, I believe, in the face of natural danger by roaming nomads.
[Guest]: So if you look at Zeus, for example, was the lord of thunder and lightning.
[Guest]: And here you had Indra, who's now dropped once.
[Guest]: I think electricity was invented and houses were invented and we were not so worried about
[Guest]: thunders and rain.
[Guest]: Indra lost his mojo, as it were.
[Guest]: And then, so now the gods of the moment, Murugan, though, Muruga is an old god who went, has
[Guest]: tribal roots.
[Guest]: Shiva is a newcomer and Vishnu in the long span of time.
[Guest]: So I think this invention that happened around faith fascinates me because they made sense.
[Guest]: For example, again, there is one tradition where after a child is born for a certain
[Guest]: number of days, the family should not, we should quarantine essentially.
[Guest]: And even today, I know Hindus in my building complex who follow that without realizing
[Guest]: that tradition, probably that rule probably came about because of infection and that doesn't
[Guest]: exist anymore.
[Guest]: Even today, my mother, after going to visit, to pay a condolence visit to her friend, will
[Guest]: come back and take a bath.
[Guest]: Again, invented because if you go in a village to a place where there were dead bodies, the
[Guest]: danger of infection.
[Guest]: But we have these mindless things that we follow that don't make sense anymore.
[Guest]: And once you get into this religion, you will see, as you just pointed out, that said the
[Guest]: chaturmasya vrata, I kind of defend it now because it's a way no different from the value
[Guest]: and the keto diet that we follow.
[Guest]: I think doing eating certain foods for a month will tell you what your body is capable of
[Guest]: digesting.
[Guest]: So I have no quarrel with that.
[Guest]: But you're right in that the macro point you make of inventions becoming irrelevant and
[Guest]: still being followed exists in all all over India.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, I followed both the keto and the intermittent fasting at different
[Amit Varma]: points in time.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing with intermittent fasting is that all religions have some form of fasting
[Amit Varma]: or the other built in that is actually good for the body in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And religions figured this out and they may have built other mythologies and stories around
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But it's the right thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll leave my listeners with an interesting exercise before we move on to the next point,
[Amit Varma]: which is that think about it and make a list of traditions which you know of for which
[Amit Varma]: the original reason no longer exists for why it might have evolved.
[Amit Varma]: But they sort of continue to the present day.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll move on to my next question, which is from your Kashi chapter, where I loved
[Amit Varma]: your first paragraph.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to take a tangent as we get there, where you write, quote, a dead cow is floating
[Amit Varma]: down the river Ganga.
[Amit Varma]: She is a black and white Holstein Friesian cow like the one I own in Bengaluru.
[Amit Varma]: She floats sideways, legs spread eagled, half of her face is visible even though it is dark.
[Amit Varma]: 7pm.
[Amit Varma]: I wish I could say that she looks peaceful, but her teeth are bad as if hurt, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a delightful para by itself and partly because of, you know, that half sentence
[Amit Varma]: like the one I own in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, of course, something that you've written an entire book about.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so that our listeners can get familiar with a little more of your work and
[Amit Varma]: not just this book.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a brief tangent while you tell me about your fascination with cows and how
[Amit Varma]: you came to own one.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit, for plugging my previous book, which is called The Cows of Bangalore
[Guest]: in India and Milk Lady of Bangalore in Foreign Countries.
[Guest]: The book is about how a woman who sells milk in Bangalore to the army cantonment opposite
[Guest]: my house, she would bring a milk can and sell it, approached me one day and said, do you
[Guest]: want to buy fresh milk?
[Guest]: And I was used to Nandini milk packets.
[Guest]: And I decided I would buy fresh milk from her and we became friends.
[Guest]: And later she approached me and said, I want a loan for 60,000 rupees to buy a cow.
[Guest]: And she does the hard sell and says, you know, you should be lucky that I approached you
[Guest]: because the Jain family below who live below you would have killed to get a cow.
[Guest]: But I'm asking you instead.
[Guest]: So there was all the hard selling happening.
[Guest]: And then here is where the long arm of tradition touches me.
[Guest]: My father and father in law at that time were both turning 81.
[Guest]: And everybody in my extended household was, all my aunts were saying, you should do Godan,
[Guest]: which is very, very important for this particular life stage.
[Guest]: So I said, maybe God is handing this Godan thing in my hand.
[Guest]: And of course, all these prescriptions say the Godan has to be the Desi cow to a Brahmin.
[Guest]: Sarla was not a Brahmin, she was a woman and Parthai from a Desi cow.
[Guest]: But I did it anyway.
[Guest]: So what I did was I gave her a loan, which ended up becoming a gift of 75,000 rupees
[Guest]: to buy the cow and then continue her business.
[Guest]: And I gave her the advance that was paid for the book as a kind of a thank you as well.
[Guest]: And it was a wonderful exercise in writing the book.
[Guest]: And it also began as a series of columns.
[Guest]: I think it really touched people because I had readers who came in from Delhi, and who
[Guest]: said, I want to donate 30,000 rupees to this woman.
[Guest]: And I suddenly thought, oh, God, they shouldn't think I'm doing this commission business.
[Guest]: So I've had people who met Sarla, who are from my readers and donated to her.
[Guest]: So this book is about Sarla.
[Guest]: But it's also about why cows are so important in Hinduism to the point where the common
[Guest]: word in which priests begin an invocation by asking for your Ghotra.
[Guest]: Ghotra means cowshed, which cowshed do you belong to?
[Guest]: That's the root of the word.
[Guest]: And of course, all the rivers, Godavari, Govardhan, Gokul, any word that begins with go, has a
[Guest]: link to a cow.
[Guest]: And that's why cows, if once you start looking, are steeped in India.
[Guest]: And again, the fascinating thing is, why are we obsessed with cows and not that the boas
[Guest]: tortoise is a species that originated in Turkey, you go to Turkey, nobody cares about cows.
[Guest]: So again, why have we preserved this, the Vedas begin with a verse about the cow and
[Guest]: the sun rises, portrayed as the sun rose like the cows walk out of cowshed.
[Guest]: So in poetry, in scriptures, in colloquial language, cows are everywhere.
[Guest]: And we have somehow managed to preserve it.
[Guest]: And now cows are part of politics, which is the sad part.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the rhetorical question that you just asked, is there an answer to it that
[Amit Varma]: you've, you know, why are cows so sacred for us?
[Amit Varma]: You know, why do cows play such a, you know, a big role in our society so much so that
[Amit Varma]: you know, even Mahatma Gandhi wrote about it in, in Swaraj and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So it was a political issue for a lot longer than recently, in fact, all of the pet issues
[Amit Varma]: of modern political Hindutva, whether they are love jihad, or cow slaughter, or whatever
[Amit Varma]: have been issues for like more than a century now.
[Amit Varma]: But what's the big deal, but like, I'm trying to think of the proximate local cause for
[Amit Varma]: it, like, was it the one domestic animal from which they got milk, and they played a lot
[Amit Varma]: of placed a lot of value on that.
[Amit Varma]: And there was all those factors fed into it.
[Amit Varma]: And why us?
[Amit Varma]: Why only us?
[Guest]: So the nomads worship the horses, because when the horses eat grass, and they pull it
[Guest]: by the root, so you have to move on.
[Guest]: Every civilization, whether it is Indus Valley or Mesopotamia had animals that were part
[Guest]: of their milieu.
[Guest]: So ostensibly, you could have the goat as the primary animal instead of the cow, because
[Guest]: the goat gives milk as well.
[Guest]: I think in India, the reason we worship cows is that we figured out ways to use cow dung
[Guest]: to use the we figured out ways to make every aspect of the cow count of fermentation, I
[Guest]: think, using the dahi, not just the root, but the dahi and the buttermilk.
[Guest]: I think the killer app was the ghee.
[Guest]: I think Indians invented ghee and enshrined the cow.
[Guest]: And that was it.
[Guest]: That was the fork in the road.
[Guest]: We created ghee and that forever then since then the cow was holy and sacred.
[Guest]: So again, it comes back to food.
[Amit Varma]: As someone who's just gotten back on the keto diet and was on it for a long time, a couple
[Amit Varma]: of years ago, I'm happy to say that I'm quite happy to consider ghee as something holy.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm not sure that, you know, my reverence would extend to the source of the ghee.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is about the Ganga now you've kind of pointed out about how, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: your chapter on Kashi about how the state of the Ganga, which we don't need to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: upon you start the chapter with the cow floating later.
[Amit Varma]: I think there's a dead buffalo somewhere and people are dipping themselves with a dead
[Amit Varma]: buffalo right next to them and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about the different myths and origin stories like the Bhagavata Purana myth
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I was kind of wondering about this deification of the Ganga as a holy river.
[Amit Varma]: Would it possibly come about because the people whose narrative version of Hinduism quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote Hinduism won out over the centuries were the people who lived in the Gangetic
[Amit Varma]: Plain?
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with Tony Joseph who wrote that wonderful book on the Indians.
[Amit Varma]: And in that he points out how that, you know, basically till 2000 years ago till about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 0 BC or 0 AD, I don't even know what to call it.
[Amit Varma]: But till that year, there was actually there were centuries of intermingling between all
[Amit Varma]: the people in the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: But then a particular school of thinking about religion wins out and that's a school of thought
[Amit Varma]: which is strong in the Gangetic Plain, which is why when you look at the DNA records from
[Amit Varma]: back then, you see there's a lot of endogamy, which is why, you know, David Reich once said
[Amit Varma]: that the Han Chinese are one big population, but Indians aren't one big population.
[Amit Varma]: They are a collection of many, many small populations because of the endogamy brought
[Amit Varma]: about by the caste system, which was a profound and mind-blowing insight for me when I heard
[Amit Varma]: about it from Tony and it's scientific fact.
[Amit Varma]: So could part of the reason for why the Ganga, you know, got this holy status is because
[Amit Varma]: of that, because of people who were living there, their narrative was a winning narrative
[Amit Varma]: for, you know, all these centuries.
[Guest]: Yeah, history is written by the winners is what you are saying and you're saying, I hadn't
[Guest]: quite thought of it in that way because once, when you live in South India, the Ganga does
[Guest]: not loom as large in your imagination as it does if you lived in the Gangetic Plain.
[Guest]: But it totally makes sense, Amit.
[Guest]: And as you know, in the book, I've also asked, if you venerate the river so much, how can
[Guest]: you handle this pollution?
[Guest]: How can you pollute?
[Guest]: And I think the thing I came up with was the idea of pavitrata and gandhagi, the river
[Guest]: can be dirty, but she's still pure.
[Guest]: And in India, as with many cultures, including Russia, we have this iconic image of a bird
[Guest]: with two heads facing in opposite directions.
[Guest]: We call it gandaberunda in the South.
[Guest]: And I think that idea of pavitrata and gandhagi is an excellent example of a two-headed bird
[Guest]: who is able to hold two contradictory ideas in your head.
[Guest]: And I also ask in the book, I said, would the Ganga have been better served if she had
[Guest]: been a he?
[Guest]: If he had, if it had been a son instead of a daughter?
[Guest]: Because again, with this whole focus on the boy child in India, would we have taken better
[Guest]: care of this river had it been a male?
[Guest]: But these are speculations, all our rivers are women.
[Guest]: And all, we call her Mother Ganga, and a mother is somebody you take for granted.
[Guest]: You don't fear a mother.
[Guest]: So had it been a father or a son, would we have taken better care of this river that
[Guest]: we all so love?
[Guest]: And so again, I don't know the answer, but I raised the question in that chapter.
[Amit Varma]: And that image that you painted in that chapter about, you know, all these people taking a
[Amit Varma]: holy dip in the Ganges as there's a dead buffalo floating just besides them.
[Amit Varma]: It also struck me as a powerful metaphor for how we normalize all that is ugly about our
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: For some people, the buffalo is invisible to them because they're in the holy Ganges.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, in our society, we are surrounded by so much that is ugly and toxic, and it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't exist.
[Amit Varma]: It's the unseen as it were.
[Amit Varma]: You know, do you think that it makes sense at that level?
[Guest]: I've thought about this a lot, Amit.
[Guest]: I think, why are we so outraged by Catholic priests becoming, being pedophiles?
[Guest]: I think anything that religion does, we tend to think of it as the purveyors of faith to
[Guest]: be more pure, more holy, more good.
[Guest]: We ascribe a morality to the people who are surrounding faith that perhaps it doesn't
[Guest]: exist as we have discovered time and time again in every faith.
[Guest]: It is the mullahs who are issuing the fatwas.
[Guest]: It is the holiest of men who are raping children.
[Guest]: And here it is the, you know, the, what was the Hinduism correlation to exist at multiple
[Guest]: levels.
[Guest]: So is it a fallacy is what I'm asking.
[Guest]: Maybe we shouldn't.
[Guest]: Maybe we should say that humans who practice faith and are devout are just as bad as the
[Guest]: rest of us.
[Guest]: Maybe that's the argument itself is flawed or what we ascribe to them.
[Guest]: We expect them to be holier than thou when they are not.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the slightly more cheerful subject of food now, where in this chapter
[Amit Varma]: on Kashi at one point, you write one among many delightful sentences in the book.
[Amit Varma]: You write, quote, Chopin's nocturnes have nothing on the twin sounds of a jalebi and
[Amit Varma]: a kachori sizzling in oil right next to each other.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And a little later you write, quote, an impassive man ladles aloo sabzi into one leaf bowl and
[Amit Varma]: the kachori in another.
[Amit Varma]: Now comes a dilemma.
[Amit Varma]: How to stand balance these two bowls in one hand and eat with the other.
[Amit Varma]: The others around me are doing just fine, having years of practice.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously mouth is already watering, even though I'm on keto and I can't have all of
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: But this is, you know, tell me your experience, you know, eating this food and you know how
[Amit Varma]: all of that was.
[Guest]: I wish I could be a Kashi Vasi.
[Guest]: I would move to Haridwar or Allahabad or any of I think I could live there and just for
[Guest]: the food.
[Guest]: And Kashi especially, you go to the Sankatamochan Hanuman temple, you have the Vedas and every
[Guest]: morning you have these beautifully dressed male priests who wear just a dhoti as it should
[Guest]: be worn with the kache in between your legs and little Ls on top, which is again, makes
[Guest]: sense for a tropical country like India.
[Guest]: And on a tangent, you go to Tamil Nadu, which is the hottest state, and you have these men,
[Guest]: young boys with tight jeans and full sleeve shirt and you're thinking, what are you thinking?
[Guest]: Why don't you wear a dhoti like all your ancestors did?
[Guest]: But that's my pet peeve with respect to textiles.
[Guest]: The food at North Indian temples to me was amazing, perhaps because I grew up here in
[Guest]: the south and I used to the payasam and the neyappam and everything.
[Guest]: I found Jaipur to be a fantastic food town.
[Guest]: I found Kashi, definitely Haridwar.
[Guest]: They would be my top three picks.
[Guest]: Puri, the bhog is what is most famous about it.
[Guest]: But again, because they make an attempt to hold on to the root vegetables and tubers
[Guest]: that are indigenous of India, and also the spices that are indigenous.
[Guest]: I would say it is simple food and not the spicy food that I like.
[Guest]: Puri was a food town, as a food temple, it fell a little below Kashi, but Kashi was a
[Guest]: gastronomic paradise.
[Guest]: I mean, Haridwar too.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also spoken about how, you know, peras can be considered by some as a fertility
[Amit Varma]: tonic.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, someone told you, quote, a good pera should make your tongue clap.
[Guest]: Stop.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not, I'm not one who likes sweets.
[Guest]: I think if I, like you said earlier, my desert island food or last meal food would be a samosa
[Guest]: or a kachori.
[Guest]: But yeah, I would make an exception to this pera.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not a desert person either.
[Amit Varma]: But if I ever go to Kashi, I promise to try the pera.
[Amit Varma]: You also talk about the sesame rice, besan ka sheera and thandai with bhang.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, there was a time and, you know, I'll take this tangent to ask you a question
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, thandai with bhang gives the impression and bhang, of course, is from the
[Amit Varma]: cannabis plant and gives the impression of Hindus and the religion as being really chilled
[Amit Varma]: out having fun.
[Amit Varma]: And you go back and you've spoken about how there is so much erotica, not just in Khajuraho
[Amit Varma]: and Ajanta Ellora and wherever, but even in our myths and you've quoted some stuff about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, very raunchy action between gods that is happening, which I won't read out
[Amit Varma]: now because who knows, we might have a family audience, are their children listening to
[Amit Varma]: this?
[Amit Varma]: And so what kind of happened?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, you get the sense that there is sort of one way of interpreting Hinduism
[Amit Varma]: or living Hinduism or living the culture of our land, which is full of fun, which is joyful,
[Amit Varma]: which is, you know, embracing the sensual pleasures as they often still do with regard
[Amit Varma]: to food.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there's also a clash between a certain kind of almost a new Puritanism
[Amit Varma]: that has kind of come up, which frowns upon all these pleasures.
[Amit Varma]: What's your sense of this evolution?
[Amit Varma]: Are the two coexisting or is there actually a kind of a clash between them with one losing
[Guest]: out?
[Guest]: So I think it was a clash, my answer and my theory would be it was a clash of the civilizations
[Guest]: and I would blame to a large extent being colonized on it for the reason for the Puritanism.
[Guest]: I think that when you had colonial masters whose gaze was very distant and who ascribed
[Guest]: value judgments to the way we dress and the way we live, even today, the white man as
[Guest]: an immigrant, I can tell you when you live around white men, you develop a complex that
[Guest]: somehow you have to live up to them and there's a certain sense of inferiority.
[Guest]: So I think colonizing India, you could say the British gave up the railways and tea culture
[Guest]: and everything, but they just took away a lot.
[Guest]: And one of the things they took away was our sense of unselfconsciousness about our body
[Guest]: and the clothes we wear, the, you know, this prudishness about the breasts and the body
[Guest]: and the saris and everything.
[Guest]: And as you point out in the book, the sensuousness of faith was lost, was shorn, was cut off
[Guest]: completely because our colonial masters would not have any of it.
[Guest]: The Victorian norms that they were used to where if the body was bound and corseted and
[Guest]: sort of, you know, we say in India today that the girls are asked to, you know, cover their
[Guest]: bodies and everything.
[Guest]: I think that the Victorians, they handed it down to us before that, and you see some of
[Guest]: the old photographs of tribal women, it's very self-confident, it's very accepting of
[Guest]: their own body.
[Guest]: So I would blame the clash of the civilizations when the colonial colonization of India happened
[Guest]: that led to this, as you say, call it puritanism and prudishness.
[Amit Varma]: No, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something many people don't realize, the thing that this prudishness is somehow
[Amit Varma]: sanskari as it were part of our culture.
[Amit Varma]: I did a great episode on Kerala with Manu Pillai, where he spoke about this as well,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, till we were colonized, the women used to walk around bare breasted and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it wasn't thought about as something erotic or something that will make the men
[Amit Varma]: lose control or something that should involve any kind of shame.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that changed with the Victorian values of the British, which somehow magically
[Amit Varma]: then became part of our sanskar.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll kind of not look at the next couple of chapters in detail, though I love them,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in Ajmer, you talk about kesariya bhaat, which is all vegetarian, but there's
[Amit Varma]: also the story about how Shah Jahan mixed, you know, the blood of a nilgai or a blue
[Amit Varma]: bull in there.
[Amit Varma]: And you also talk about how Akbar started this tradition of the bari deg, a cauldron
[Amit Varma]: so big that you could feed 15,000 people from that one cauldron, which was delightful.
[Amit Varma]: In Palani, you write about the panchamritham or the five nectars and again, how they are
[Amit Varma]: composed is all local circumstances and it's all automated production now, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, with the changing times or once upon a time, you know, people used to prepare it
[Amit Varma]: by stamping on it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I was interested by something that I read in the chapter after that, which is about
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai and which is about the Benes Israelis.
[Amit Varma]: And there, right at the start, you speak about how you were talking to an aunt of yours about
[Amit Varma]: Jewish people, and she wasn't so familiar with them.
[Amit Varma]: And then you had to tell her that you remember in Kochi, there was a place called Jew town
[Amit Varma]: where the Jews were from, and she remarked, quote, Jew town, where good cardamom was available,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And that association of a people with the food, you know, how strong is that in different
[Amit Varma]: parts of the country?
[Amit Varma]: And I don't just mean a religion with a food, but different peoples in different places
[Amit Varma]: with certain kinds of food.
[Amit Varma]: And the other danger that then comes about is the danger of essentialism.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when we are describing something, it is natural to try to get to the essence of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you write about the Sikhs, that one of the beautiful things about the Sikhs, which
[Amit Varma]: we think of and which fills even me with emotion when I think of all that they have done is
[Amit Varma]: their langars, their, you know, that whole tradition of service of feeding people and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out different things about each of the religions, which are native to
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, you can look at these sort of these attributes that you associate
[Amit Varma]: with a religion or particular foods that you associate with a religion.
[Amit Varma]: But where do you cross the line into essentialism, where you're simplifying too much and perhaps
[Amit Varma]: do a disservice to the complexity of a tradition?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you've thought about?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think the essentialism comes about when you have to explain the faith to a mass
[Guest]: audience, not a follower or a group that is local and standing in front of you.
[Guest]: I think what happens with television, the media, or now with YouTube, where people are
[Guest]: looking for takeaways, and I do that too in my book, I end each chapter with the takeaway.
[Guest]: So once you get into this takeaway culture or life hacks or anything, you are forced
[Guest]: to explain, you're forced to leave out the nuances for the soundbite.
[Guest]: So I think that when you get into that culture, what you say becomes the norm, Amit.
[Guest]: And the question is, is that good or bad?
[Guest]: And I don't think you've raised it, but I haven't made up my mind about it.
[Guest]: Because on the one hand, it would be great for me to understand the Parsi faith in one
[Guest]: paragraph.
[Guest]: But that is what that would be essentialism, it would leave out all of the nuances out
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: But at least I would have a semblance of some knowledge on it.
[Guest]: I think unfortunately, or fortunately, we are moving towards a time when this will become
[Guest]: more and more Amit, because as you know, there are apps that say, oh, don't have the time
[Guest]: to read a book, here, read the paragraph and we'll condense it for you.
[Guest]: Don't have the time to scan magazines, we will give it to you.
[Guest]: And there's one called Blinkist, where you blink and you'll get some knowledge.
[Guest]: So essentialism is a feature of our time, I think it is hard to escape it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, perhaps both a feature and a bug in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: And in that chapter on Jews, you talk about how they share halva with us, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: a delightful little throwaway line about how chicken soup is sometimes known as Jewish
[Amit Varma]: penicillin, which speaks to the medical properties and how a particular ritual that they have
[Amit Varma]: involves what might well be poha.
[Amit Varma]: So that's interesting to me.
[Amit Varma]: And also how, you know, Chitravan Brahmans might actually be Bene Israelis, you know,
[Amit Varma]: similarities such as, you know, Aptekar and Apte, and Aptekar is, by the way, a name from
[Amit Varma]: there and we might have adapted it to Apte.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a very interesting speculation, which listeners might enjoy.
[Guest]: Let me move on to now talking about...
[Guest]: If I can interject, so to your point about chicken soup and penicillin, in Tamil households,
[Guest]: when a child falls sick, we give them rasam.
[Guest]: And one of my pet projects is to find out what different states or regions have as their
[Guest]: chicken soup, quote-unquote, the proverb.
[Guest]: I mean, what would a sick child in Maharashtra get, for example, or in not even Maharashtra,
[Guest]: say Kolhapur or Nashik or different parts, for example, what would a child in Kerala
[Guest]: get?
[Guest]: Probably a fish gruel, some thought.
[Guest]: So that would be a fun exercise to go to different parts and find out what is the equivalent
[Guest]: food that you give when a child is sick, the gruel or the rasam.
[Amit Varma]: That's so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: What did you get, Amit?
[Guest]: As a kid?
[Guest]: When you were sick?
[Guest]: Hmm.
[Amit Varma]: Specifically to when you were sick?
[Amit Varma]: Shobha, I'll confess to you that I got chicken soup.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's the privilege of growing up in a certain kind of family, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I love rasam and I'm interested in finding this out.
[Amit Varma]: And can I ask our listeners if they have answers to these questions to maybe write to you on
[Guest]: Twitter or something?
[Guest]: Tag you on Twitter?
[Guest]: That would be fantastic.
[Guest]: What did you eat as a kid when you were sick?
[Guest]: What did your mom give you?
[Guest]: Not even what you ate.
[Amit Varma]: What did your mother give you?
[Amit Varma]: What a wonderful question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So please, guys, you heard it here.
[Amit Varma]: Please tag Shobha and let her know.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe we'll just start a thread with it.
[Amit Varma]: So it's all in one place.
[Amit Varma]: I'll now move on to, you know, another of my favorite dishes, which is again now just
[Amit Varma]: talking about it and reading your description of it is tempting me to come out of keto,
[Amit Varma]: which is when you talk about Madurai and you're talking about the prasadam there.
[Amit Varma]: You talk at length about dosa, why the dosa there is so incredibly unique and all of that.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: In Madurai, it was one of the few temples where it was a savory prasadam.
[Guest]: And I, as I've told you before, I prefer savories to sweets.
[Guest]: So that's what blew me away.
[Guest]: But also that it was unusual.
[Guest]: And this I asked the priest there, why have you chosen this dosa?
[Guest]: This dosa is the one that's offered to God is about the size of a tire, a car tire.
[Guest]: The one that is sold as prasadam is about the size of a personal pan pizza or maybe
[Guest]: slightly smaller.
[Guest]: But the one that is offered is huge and it is deep fried in ghee and contains all good
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: It was my favorite prasadam to eat.
[Guest]: So I asked the priest there, why did you choose this dosa?
[Guest]: And he said, it is a larger version of the Tirumal Vadai that is given to Lord Balaji
[Guest]: in Tirupati.
[Guest]: So this was a kind of a borrowing of a tradition and making it your own.
[Guest]: And the other thing that I loved about this Madurai Azhagar Kovil is that it is not a
[Guest]: rock star temple, but it is a hoary, it has a hoary history.
[Guest]: So I went with all good intentions to write about Meenakshi, the warrior goddess who rode
[Guest]: a horse and conquered armies.
[Guest]: But then somebody told me about this other temple with a more interesting prasadam and
[Guest]: that's what made it to the book.
[Amit Varma]: And what's your favorite kind of dosa?
[Amit Varma]: Because my friends in Bangalore and Chennai will often argue about what is the best kind
[Amit Varma]: of dosa and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I love having dosa in Bangalore whenever I go there, especially MTR and all because
[Amit Varma]: and actually any place out there, Adigarh, MTR, I just love the dosa there.
[Guest]: You don't get stuff like that in Bombay, where do you stand?
[Guest]: You should go to CTR or Central Tiffin Room.
[Guest]: They have a very good benne dosa.
[Guest]: You should have idli and Brahmin coffee in Shamrajpet, but the dosa you should go to
[Amit Varma]: Vidyarthi Bhavan or CTR.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll again take another tangent from sort of the subject of food and, you know, quote
[Amit Varma]: a paragraph that you've written in that chapter on Madurai, which I found fascinating because
[Amit Varma]: it underscored a point I kind of keep making that the kind of work that you do shapes you.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I wrote a post about this in my newsletter about how the form that you
[Amit Varma]: choose to work in will shape your work.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore the work that you choose to do will shape you.
[Amit Varma]: So a simple decision about what form you take can change the person that you are.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I have to think differently when I'm doing a three hour long form conversation
[Amit Varma]: podcast than if I was doing like 15 minute things, I think, you know, my thinking on
[Amit Varma]: any subject would be far shallower than.
[Amit Varma]: And I was reminded of that by this fascinating paragraph from that chapter, I'll read it
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, in a 2015 paper published in the journal Neuroimage, a team of scientists from the
[Amit Varma]: Center for Mind-Brain Sciences at the University of Trento, Italy studied the brains of professional
[Amit Varma]: Vedic Sanskrit pundits in India who were used to memorizing and reciting 40,000 to 100,000
[Amit Varma]: word oral texts and discovered, and now this is a quote from the study, massive gray matter
[Amit Varma]: density and cortical thickness increase, you know, that quote stops in the brains of the
[Amit Varma]: Vedic priests, somewhat similar to what was seen in London taxi drivers in previous studies.
[Amit Varma]: The paper, which is available online is fascinating not only because it describes how the Vedic
[Amit Varma]: priest brains changed, but also because it talks about the subjects and their training.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't really have a question here, but I absolutely loved your observation after
[Amit Varma]: this that these are not people who could have gotten that gray matter because they got it
[Amit Varma]: in their genes and they descended from some particular family or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: The boys were more or less picked in a kind of a random way.
[Amit Varma]: They could just come from anywhere and obviously these are boys only, and they could really
[Amit Varma]: come from anywhere and their brains changed because of the kind of study and the work
[Amit Varma]: that they did, which is so fascinating to me and something that I just wanted to point
[Amit Varma]: out to listeners that the things that you do shapes who you are in, you know, fundamental
[Amit Varma]: ways that can even be physiological.
[Amit Varma]: So this was quite a sort of a TIL moment for me.
[Amit Varma]: You have any, you know, further thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So this is something Wendy Doniger points out in one of her books, I mean, is that she
[Guest]: says India as a civilization has Shruti literature, she differentiates between Shruti and Smriti.
[Guest]: Shruti literature is just third literature and that's how it was transmitted for hundreds
[Guest]: of thousands of years and Smriti is when it started being written down.
[Guest]: And her point was that the Shruti literature was preserved unchanged with the meter and
[Guest]: the way of intonation for hundreds of thousands of years, contradicting the point of view
[Guest]: that says if you want to remember something and if you want to preserve it, write it down.
[Guest]: So India was a living example of how a culture preserved many texts, all the Brahmanas, all
[Guest]: the Vedas, for hundreds of thousands of years just by listening.
[Guest]: So we as a culture have a propensity for remembering things and we should not squander it.
[Guest]: Even the epic of Gilgamesh, which is one of the oldest books in the world, it was preserved
[Guest]: as writing on stone tablets.
[Guest]: There was no oral passing on, whereas here in India, we passed on orally our music.
[Guest]: It was all oral.
[Guest]: So as a culture, if you believe that there are traits that belong to a culture, oral
[Guest]: listening and remembering is one of ours and we should seize it and embrace it and make
[Amit Varma]: it our own.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and maybe we should kind of make a conscious effort to do it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like my writing students will often tell me that there are so many good apps,
[Amit Varma]: I can use Grammarly or the Hemingway app and should I do that?
[Amit Varma]: And my answer always is that if it helps you, please use it.
[Amit Varma]: If it brings value, please use it.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you have to learn to think for yourself about what is good writing
[Amit Varma]: and what isn't and how you want to write and you know, you can't lose the ability to sort
[Amit Varma]: of think for yourself as you know, you and I have been forced to do for so many years
[Amit Varma]: and writing hundreds and hundreds of columns.
[Amit Varma]: So after your Madurai chapter, you had a great chapter on Jaipur, an interesting brief chapter
[Amit Varma]: on Goa where I was struck by this quote, which I'm going to ask you to elaborate upon, where
[Amit Varma]: you quoted Gerard de Kuna once telling you, quote, Portugal did Goa a great favor.
[Amit Varma]: We were cut off from the shackles of Indian tradition.
[Amit Varma]: We were forced to look outside, stop quote, tell me a little bit about this.
[Amit Varma]: And I presume at least part of this is in the context of food.
[Amit Varma]: And just another aside, I remember when I would spend time in Macau, Macau was also
[Amit Varma]: once colonized by the Portuguese.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd actually noticed some similarities in certain items of theirs and what you could
[Amit Varma]: get in Goa.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, but, you know, just elaborate on his point for me, because again, I found
[Amit Varma]: this quite fascinating.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, Goa is a place that all of India loves.
[Guest]: I think my view into Goa was shaped largely by the late great Wendell Rodericks, the designer
[Guest]: who showed me how in his own village in Golwale, the ancient tribal traditions coexisted with
[Guest]: the Hindu past and a Christian present and what Gerard de Kuna said about Portugal.
[Guest]: I think what my takeaway was from his quote is that any time you have Portugal in a sense
[Guest]: made Goans immigrants in their own land, because you come in as a conqueror and you enforce
[Guest]: certain norms on the people.
[Guest]: And then what happens is as citizens, you're forced to choose between your master and your
[Guest]: tradition.
[Guest]: And a lot of Goans chose Portugal as their mother tongue.
[Guest]: I quote Mario Miranda saying Portuguese is my mother tongue.
[Guest]: So, what ends up happening to differentiate it from, say, Kerala, where the colonizing
[Guest]: was more religious with St. Thomas and everything was that Goans felt very adept and easy about
[Guest]: adopting music from Portugal, clothes, the language, and it cuts off the shackles of
[Guest]: the past and what he was saying.
[Guest]: And I could, and anyone who goes to Goa today can even today see it, because you see they're
[Guest]: very avant-garde in their thinking, in the fashions they follow, restaurants they open,
[Guest]: the life they lead.
[Guest]: It's a very symbiotic culture, which has a little bit of the Portugal influence, a little
[Guest]: bit of the Hindus, a little bit of the Christian.
[Guest]: So, it's a very Jowadi weave.
[Guest]: So, I loved it.
[Guest]: And I think that's why most Indians love Goa and go there often.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, it's a fascinating example of being exposed to the world without actually having to go
[Amit Varma]: anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost kind of right here.
[Amit Varma]: You said it better than me.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I can't say it better than you.
[Amit Varma]: Your book has so many wonderful moments.
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote another bit about food to get back to food, because who can resist it?
[Amit Varma]: And this is from your chapter about Thiruvanthapuram, which has a subtitle of the Elephant God's
[Amit Varma]: Fried Dumplings.
[Amit Varma]: And you write here about Uniappam and you say, quote, you know, before I embark upon
[Amit Varma]: this quote, all my South Indian listeners, please forgive my pronunciations.
[Amit Varma]: Do remember that I am, after all, an Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, Kottarakara Temple is known for its Uniappam, or fried dumplings made with rice
[Amit Varma]: flour, coconut, jaggery, ghee, dry ginger, cardamom and quiche banana, a local variety
[Amit Varma]: known as Palayam Thodan.
[Amit Varma]: They are loosely mixed in giant vats and fried in ghee or oil on a slow day.
[Amit Varma]: The temple makes 50,000 such dumplings, a number that can rise to 170,000 during festivals,
[Amit Varma]: according to Mohan Thirumeni.
[Amit Varma]: Unusual for temples, these Uniappams are cooked in front of the deity in an alcove rather
[Amit Varma]: than in a separate secret chamber.
[Amit Varma]: And in another part in your chapter on Puri, you know, you've written about the sort of
[Amit Varma]: elaborate work that goes into making their Chappan Bhog.
[Amit Varma]: The Chappan Bhog, by the way, has 56 ingredients, which is why it's called Chappan Bhog.
[Amit Varma]: The Amitanmi is useful now, Chappan is 56 in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about how, quote, no outsider is allowed inside the temple kitchen except
[Amit Varma]: the 1,000 male cooks who make 56 different kinds of offerings called Chappan Bhog to
[Amit Varma]: serve to the gods six times a day.
[Amit Varma]: The list of dishes isn't just 56, it runs to the hundreds.
[Amit Varma]: The lord along with his family likes variety.
[Amit Varma]: The sweet dishes alone are of over 50 types, including several types of laddus, malpua,
[Amit Varma]: kheer and roshagulla, making this a diabetics nightmare.
[Amit Varma]: Thankfully, there are also boiled rice dishes, lentil based ones, vegetable curries and their
[Amit Varma]: permutations and combinations.
[Amit Varma]: Food is central to worship in this temple because you see Lord Vishnu dines here, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just fascinated by the scale of this.
[Amit Varma]: Like we often read about how, you know, churches in Europe were built to be so grand because
[Amit Varma]: they wanted that to give, you know, devotees a sense of how grand religion is so that they
[Amit Varma]: would feel that sense of awe towards their God, you know, and just reading about the
[Amit Varma]: kind of scale at which this kind of cooking is being done.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just these 1,000 cooks later on, you point out about how the kitchens are
[Amit Varma]: spread out over an acre and you have 200 junior cooks who are not allowed to enter the kitchens
[Amit Varma]: who are doing the prep work and they're grating hundreds of coconuts while chanting the name
[Amit Varma]: of the Lord.
[Amit Varma]: And they're also chopping vegetables.
[Amit Varma]: This is crazy.
[Amit Varma]: This scale is mind-blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Although you didn't go into the kitchen in Puri, you did enter many of the other kitchens.
[Amit Varma]: What was and you also, of course, in the West entered the commercial kitchens of some of
[Amit Varma]: the best restaurants in the world.
[Amit Varma]: You know, give me a sense of how that feeling was about entering these kitchens, seeing
[Amit Varma]: this work.
[Guest]: So remember that experiment I said go to a temple during the course of this year if you
[Guest]: just want to see if you have it in you to become faithful or devout.
[Guest]: I would say start with Puri because it is a majestic, marvelous temple in every sense
[Guest]: of the word.
[Guest]: It is a temple with a history and an amalgamation that is so fantastic.
[Guest]: It is has every faith that was prominent in India of the time being part of this temple.
[Guest]: And as far as the cooking goes, it was very, it is very tantric.
[Guest]: You couldn't enter, but they have 752 chulas or wood-fired stoves.
[Guest]: Each of the chulas I'm told is a tantric design with many triangles.
[Guest]: And the cook, one of the most poignant things during that trip was one of the priest cook.
[Guest]: I mean, the Suaras told me that if I think even for a moment that I am the one cooking,
[Guest]: the nine pots will shatter because actually it is goddess Vimala who is cooking the food.
[Guest]: And he, you know, it's hard to convey that in a book, but he actually believed that.
[Guest]: He wasn't, his stance, his eyes told me.
[Guest]: So to me, that is a sublimation of ego.
[Guest]: You know, in many temples, the priests become holier than thou.
[Guest]: They think I'm doing Lord's work and therefore I am holy.
[Guest]: But whereas in the, I think when you are cooking temple food, you don't have the grandiosity
[Guest]: of coming that comes with a priest who stands and does the chanting and throwing of flowers
[Guest]: in front of God.
[Guest]: So in a sense, I found, remember we talked about being holier than thou, not having the
[Guest]: hypocrisies and the petty egos.
[Guest]: Temple cooks have that.
[Guest]: That you want to experience divine sublimation of the ego through humility in the presence
[Guest]: of the divine.
[Guest]: Talk to the temple cook.
[Guest]: And in Jagannath Puri, especially because it's a very, they believe really deeply in
[Guest]: the tantric notion.
[Guest]: There are nine pots.
[Guest]: Nine is a very prominent number in Hinduism.
[Guest]: You have Navaratna, Navarasa, Navagraha, the planets, and they have nine pots stacked on
[Guest]: top of each other on these wood fires and they each cook and each of the families are
[Guest]: able to sell it and make money off of it.
[Guest]: These temple cooks, I found what I was looking for and what we talked about earlier, which
[Guest]: is where you're truly humble, authentically humble and not kind of showing off and saying
[Guest]: I'm a messenger of God and therefore I'm better than you.
[Guest]: These guys actually had a taste of the divine, literally and figuratively.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: I guess just cooking, just chopping endless vegetables or whatever the processes are,
[Amit Varma]: is a kind of sadhana in itself, I guess, you know, if you're just, there you go, like a
[Amit Varma]: physical meditation almost, you're just, you know, doing the same thing again and again.
[Amit Varma]: I also love the chapter on the Kumbh Mela.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a question based on that, where at one point you quote this gentleman called
[Amit Varma]: Swami Avdeshanand, where he's talking about diversity, which is spoken about before.
[Amit Varma]: And he says, quote, Hinduism is a very diverse religion with many parts to God, puja, meditation,
[Amit Varma]: yoga, pranayama, pilgrimages, fast, chanting and satsangh.
[Amit Varma]: The Kumbh is where all this diversity comes together.
[Amit Varma]: But more than this, I was struck by something that again, the same Swami Avdeshanandji said
[Amit Varma]: a little before that, where he says, quote, the Kumbh Mela is a symbol of a secular democracy
[Amit Varma]: in action.
[Amit Varma]: For example, most of the Hindu religious offerings used in the Kumbh are packaged by Muslim
[Amit Varma]: craftsmen and the music bands have Muslim and Christian performers, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And elsewhere, you speak about how, you know, at Ajmer Sharif, when you go or in the churches
[Amit Varma]: of Goa, Hindus are taking part everywhere and they are kind of sort of involved.
[Amit Varma]: And so it seems to me that whereas in politics, we have developed almost an exclusionary view
[Amit Varma]: of religion in our culture, there is an embrace of, you know, of everything.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to me to be a strange kind of contradiction.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I remember I once had politician and thinker JP Narayan on my show, episode 149.
[Amit Varma]: And I said something about India being an illiberal society because of the misogyny
[Amit Varma]: and caste and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, no, it's also if you look at it another way, it's also a very liberal society.
[Amit Varma]: Because in our lived experience, the way we assimilate everything from everywhere, in
[Amit Varma]: that there's also a lot of tolerance there.
[Amit Varma]: And both of these are, of course, true.
[Amit Varma]: But what is your sense of going to all of these places that, you know, is the only view
[Amit Varma]: of religion you see this open, warm embrace that takes everybody in or do you also sort
[Amit Varma]: of see the other side of it?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'll go back.
[Guest]: First of all, I'm blown away that you remember that JP Narayan was episode 149.
[Guest]: So you clearly have a phenomenal memory for things, compliments on that.
[Guest]: But to answer your question, I'm going back to the Gandha Berunda, which is the eagle
[Guest]: who's with two heads looking on either direction.
[Guest]: And I think that we are, I would agree with Mr. JP Narayan that intrinsically, if you
[Guest]: are born in this earth, in India, you are raised, it's part of the water we drink and
[Guest]: this tolerance.
[Guest]: And I'll give you specific examples, I think revealed preference, they call it in economics.
[Guest]: My mother, for example, when the Babri judgment was passed, said Jai Shri Ram and you see
[Guest]: her, she is a devout Hindu.
[Guest]: But because my brother had many Muslim friends, she visited their homes and became friendly
[Guest]: with them.
[Guest]: So I think that if you look at the way these festivals are done, I wish I could attend
[Guest]: Bombay's Ganesh Chaturthi, but I'm told it's the same there where the craftsmen of all
[Guest]: states make different parts of the giant idols.
[Guest]: And for example, the chariots are made by.
[Guest]: So I think that on the one hand, we have the politics of religion that is being used to
[Guest]: win elections.
[Guest]: But in Bangalore, where I live, Hindus attend infant Jesus and pray to the mother when they
[Guest]: want children.
[Guest]: The Ajmer Darga is the Ganga Jamuna Sanskriti, as they call it.
[Guest]: I love Sufi music.
[Guest]: If you live, if you see our lived experience, it's hard not to be tolerant and embracing
[Guest]: of all faiths, because guess what?
[Guest]: They have so much to offer.
[Guest]: How can you not partake when it's available to you on offer?
[Guest]: And in India, we have the glory of multiple faiths and their invention.
[Guest]: You'd be stupid to not absorb.
[Guest]: And I think Indians do.
[Guest]: It is and I think the Indians who live in communities where all the major faiths are
[Guest]: jostling side by side, their experience of India is very different from ours who read,
[Guest]: who watch the news and therefore form opinions about the politics of religion and without
[Guest]: much of a lived experience.
[Guest]: So I think, yes, I agree with Mr. Narayan that as a nation, we are deeply tolerant and
[Guest]: that will eventually be our salvation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra recently.
[Amit Varma]: She's written that remarkable book on partition.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the sort of points that came up there was that, you know, when we hate each
[Amit Varma]: other, what we are hating is abstractions, you know, an abstract notion of the other.
[Amit Varma]: But what we embrace of the other are all the concrete little things.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, a lot of these concrete things are, you know, they're in the food where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what we eat is actually the most assimilative melting pot that you can possibly
[Amit Varma]: imagine.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one would hope that one day Indian politics can become a little bit more
[Amit Varma]: like Indian food.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I've taken enough of your time and I'll let you go soon.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, just direct all the listeners to please partake in the feast that is in
[Amit Varma]: your writing in this wonderful book.
[Amit Varma]: Did writing this book sort of, you know, what were your big learning moments during this
[Amit Varma]: book?
[Amit Varma]: You went in obviously already knowing a lot about food, having a deep sense of the history,
[Amit Varma]: having a sense of the nation as well.
[Amit Varma]: You've been to many of these temples before, but, you know, are there any big sort of learnings
[Amit Varma]: for you or revelations for you or insights for you or anything that deepened your understanding
[Amit Varma]: in the process of going to all of these places and immersing yourself in these experiences?
[Guest]: For me, it was that the importance of ritual and I saw it in temples, I saw it in the church,
[Guest]: I saw it in the one Islamic shrine that I visited.
[Guest]: And I think that if there was one thing that I have changed my attitude towards, it is
[Guest]: that I believe that humans invented rituals to mark milestones in life, to mark transition
[Guest]: from one stage of life to another, to mark a celebration or a sorrow.
[Guest]: And in urban India, certainly, and if you are of a certain rational, I would humbly
[Guest]: say, amidst much of your audience, much of your listenership, such as myself, where you
[Guest]: live in the mind of the, in the cerebral world, we are in danger of giving up rituals.
[Guest]: And again, you are throwing out the baby with the bathwater.
[Guest]: Yes, sure.
[Guest]: Rituals have superstitions.
[Guest]: That may seem nonsensical to you.
[Guest]: But when you are this dreaming ritual, as I once said, and when you are saying they
[Guest]: are superstitions and intolerant, and, you know, are based on planetary transmutations
[Guest]: and things like that, you also give up rituals that are linked to when a daughter leaves
[Guest]: home or when a son goes to college, something to mark that we, it is so much a part of us.
[Guest]: If you go to Chennai airport, people welcome somebody with a garland, that is a ritual.
[Guest]: And we don't do that, so-called educated people, we've stopped that.
[Guest]: When a woman is pregnant, the neighbors bring her favorite food.
[Guest]: That is a ritual.
[Guest]: So I would say if I had a plea or an entreaty to your listeners, I would say, find your
[Guest]: rituals and, you know, figure it out and make it up if you must.
[Guest]: But we have such a rich vein of rituals in our culture.
[Guest]: Find one that you like.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: If you are not a Shiva worshipper, find a rock, collect a few rocks, everyday pour some
[Guest]: water over it and then pour it on your Tulsi plant.
[Guest]: That's the ritual.
[Guest]: It will give you calm.
[Guest]: It will give you the meditative state that Sam Harris so applauds.
[Guest]: And we have it.
[Guest]: Why not use it?
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: You've given me, you know, through the book and through this conversation, you've given
[Amit Varma]: me so much to think about and process.
[Amit Varma]: Shobha, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for having me, Amit.
[Guest]: Yours is a podcast I've enjoyed so much as a listener.
[Guest]: It is a privilege and honor that you invited me to come on it.
[Guest]: So and I'm deeply grateful.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy Shobha Narayan's wonderful book, Food and Faith, A Pilgrim's Journey
[Amit Varma]: Through India.
[Amit Varma]: This will be linked from the show notes and our other books will also be linked there.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Shobha on Twitter at Shobha Narayan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at SeenUnseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to SeenUnseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.